1. Between 1854 and 1855, three of these events named Tokai, Nankai, and Edo were collectively known as the Ansei. Goto Shinpei led infrastructure projects following a 1923 example of these events, which mostly did not impact Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel. For the point, name these natural disasters that included the Great Kanto, which destroyed many buildings in Japan.
Answer: Earthquakes (

2. This man gave the Laconia Order, which resulted in a rescue operation by the Axis after Werner Hartenstein unintentionally sank a British passenger ship. Following Hitler's suicide, this admiral served for nearly a month as president of Germany in a government with Chancellor Goebbels [[GEHR-buls]]. The creator of the "wolfpack" tactics used by U-Boats, for the point, who was this Nazi admiral, the Supreme Commander of the German Navy during World War Two?
Answer: Karl Dönitz [[DUHR-nitz]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

3. The Imperial response to this event was weakened due to the cost of recent annexations of the Vandalic and Gothic kingdoms. Court historian Procopius claimed that this pandemic killed over 10,000 people daily in Constantinople. For the point, name this "Plague" caused by yersinia pestis, often named for an ambitious 6th century Byzantine Emperor.
Answer: Plague of Justinian (or Justinianic Plague

4. This man defeated the pirate Chen Zuyi at the Battle of Palembang during a series of expeditions documented in the Mao-Kun map. This leader brought back a giraffe from Malindi after visiting the Swahili Coast. This man’s projects were stopped under the isolationist Hongxi [[HONG-SHEE]] Emperor following the death of his sponsor, the Yongle [[YONG- LUH]] Emperor. For the point, name this Chinese Muslim explorer during the Ming dynasty.
Answer: Zheng He [[ZHUNG-HUH]] (

5. Despite being in Miami at the time, this person was believed to have been responsible for the death of seven associates of Bugs Moran. This person said “they can’t collect legal taxes from illegal money” before being arrested by Eliot Ness on charges of income tax evasion. The first person to be labeled as “Public Enemy No. 1” was, for the point, what U.S. gangster who ordered the St. Valentine’s Day Massacre in Chicago?
Answer: Al Capone (or Alphonse Gabriel Capone

6. The Vandal kingdom promoted Arianism in this city, their capital, which was captured in the 5th century. After moving to this North African city, Saint Augustine of Hippo converted from Manichaeism [[man-ih-KAY-ism]] to Christianity. The biblical canon of the Western Church was confirmed at a council named for, for the point, which African city that fought the Punic Wars with Rome?
Answer: Carthage (

7. This British prime minister inspired the nickname for the "Who? Who? Ministry," because he didn't recognize any of the names on the list of cabinet members. This general had the Lines of Torres Vedras built to protect Lisbon during the Peninsular War and led the Seventh Coalition in a victory which ended the "Hundred Days." For the point, name this British general who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo.
Answer: Duke of Wellington (

8. Bactrian governor Bardiya ruled for a brief interim before this ruler took the throne after claiming he was a son of Cyrus the Great. The Ionian Revolt prompted this man to plan an invasion of the Greek mainland which ended with a loss at Marathon. For the point, name this Achaemenid [[ah-KIM-uh-nid]] king who created the "satrapy" [[SAT-rah-pee]] system and brought Persia to its largest territorial extent.
Answer: Darius I (

9. During a siege of this city, a woman named La Malinche [[la-mah-LEEN-keh]] helped the invading Spanish by serving as an interpreter. Sacrifices to Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-zee-loh-POHKT-lee]] were made at this city's Templo Mayor complex. The capital of New Spain, Mexico City, was built on the ruins of, for the point, which Aztec capital?
Answer: Tenochtitlan (

10. During this war, Saxony and Brandenburg-Prussia led the formation of the Heilbronn League in the wake of the Battle of Lutzen. This war began when Protestants led by Count Thum [[TOOM]] committed the "Second Defenestration of Prague." For the point, name this 17th-century war primarily fought in Germany, ended by a series of agreements of Westphalia.
Answer: Thirty Years' War (

11. The assault on this city began with the Battle of Sarimbun Beach. Winston Churchill called the surrender of this city the "worst disaster in British military history." This city's capture was the culmination of the Malayan campaign and involved Japanese use of bicycle infantry. For the point, name this "Gibraltar of the East" that fell to the Japanese after a weeklong battle in 1942.
Answer: Singapore (

12. The use of fiberglass and soundproofing became common in vessels designed for this activity, whose German practitioners were referred to as "very much the unsung heroes of the Kriegsmarine." Right-clicking can lead to the setting of a red flag in a game named for this military task, which involves use of towed bodies such as "oropesas" to clip dangerous objects. For the point, name this task of destroying certain bombs in open waters.
Answer: Minesweeping (

13. A man donning a jacket cursing this event was the subject of a Supreme Court case in which an opinion by Justice John Harlan read, “One man’s vulgarity is another’s lyric.” On his first full day in office, Jimmy Carter issued Proclamation 4483 which pardoned those who avoided this event. The Catonsville [[KAY-tuns-vil]] Nine and Paul Robert Cohen protested, for the point, what event that made it mandatory for men to serve in a certain conflict in Southeast Asia?
Answer: Vietnam War draft (or Vietnam War conscription

14. The Hudson’s Bay Company sponsored George Simpson to accomplish this task mostly by land. The Pelican was utilized in an English attempt to accomplish this feat authorized by Elizabeth I and overseen by a man who fought the Spanish Armada. Francis Drake accomplished this feat, originally completed by a Portuguese expedition whose leader was killed in the Philippines. For the point, name this travel feat first completed by the fleet of Ferdinand Magellan.
Answer: Circumnavigating the Earth (

15. The second movement of this piece was performed at the funerals at the eleven Israeli athletes killed at the 1972 Summer Olympics. This symphony, the second movement of which is a C minor funeral march, was rededicated to Joseph Franz Maximilian and, ultimately, to "the memory of a great man" after Napoleon crowned himself emperor. Often considered the first "Romantic" symphony, for the point, what is this third symphony by Ludwig van Beethoven?
Answer: Eroica Symphony (

16. The short-lived West Indies Federation had this city's port of Chaguaramas [[shah- gwah-RAH-mahs]] as its official capital. This majority Indian nation was named after Christopher Columbus spotted three adjacent hills which he called the Spanish word for "Trinity." Eric Williams was the first and longest-serving prime minister of, for the point, what country north of Venezuela, governed from Port of Spain?
Answer: Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (

17. Much of the force which was to assist in Operation Dynamo, the planned evacuation at Dunkirk, massed in this port due to its relative proximity. This member of the historical "Cinque [[SEENK]] Ports" inspired the poet Matthew Arnold to write a poem titled for its "Beach." Chalk makes up the White Cliffs of, for the point, what Kentish city, the former site of the Roman Portus Dubris?
Answer: Dover (

18. A Historically, a king or a priest would often play this deity in dramas in which they struck a live hippopotamus with a harpoon. Those performances took place during the Hab Nekhtet, or the Festival of Victory, that celebrated this deity. The largest temple dedicated to this deity is the Temple of Edfu, built in the Ptolemaic period. For the point, what falcon- headed deity was the patron of kings in Ancient Egypt?
Answer: Horus (or Heru; or Hor; or Har

19. The main actor of this film almost boycotted its premiere upon hearing his co-star, Hattie McDaniel, was denied entry due to the state’s Jim Crow laws. The first African- American to win an Academy Award, Hattie McDaniel, won Best Supporting Actress for this film. Starring Vivien Leigh [[LEE]] and Clark Gable, for the point, what 1939 romance film is set during the American Civil War?
Answer: Gone with the Wind

20. The inclusion of both a cane and a sword in one sculpture have led to speculation that this person was meant to be compared to Cincinnatus. The year 1788 is inscribed in that statue of this person despite being finished at least three years later by Jean-Antoine Houdon [[hoo-DOHN]]. For the point, identify this person whose life mask and measurements were taken when the sculptor visited Mount Vernon.
Answer: George Washington

21. An anti-religion campaign may have led to the false attribution of a quote to this man in which he supposedly said that he “didn’t see any God” during his most famous undertaking. A MiG-15 crash killed this man, who once served at Luostari Air Base. This backup crew member of Soyuz 1 was best-known for a single 1961 orbit. For the point, name this Soviet cosmonaut and first man in space.
Answer: Yuri Gagarin (or Yuri Alexeyivich Gagarin)

22. Rhumb lines were used in a 1569 depiction of this location that was itself inspired by a work known as “Theatre of [this place]" by Abraham Ortelius. The “pocket” variety of one type of depiction of this place was popularized among elites in the 17th century. Many depictions of this place were made during the Golden Age of Flemish cartography, including the Mercator Projection. For the point, name this planet depicted on atlases and globes.
Answer: The World (or Earth

23. This man's participation in the Battle of Boju has been challenged by his notable absence from the Commentary of Zuo. This man was listed as a minister to King Helu of Wu by Sima Qian [[CHEE-ahn]], and his descendant, Bin, wrote a book with the same title as this man's more famous work. That book by this man includes chapters on "Attacking with Fire" and "The Army on the March." For the point, name this Chinese general and author of The Art of War.
Answer: Sun Tzu (or Sun Zi; or Sun Wu

24. This empire's only African colony in Maputo was wiped out by malaria. This state lost Venetia after the Seven Weeks' War against the Prussians. This empire's heir apparent was killed in Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip in an event that kickstarted World War One. For the point, name this dual monarchy with capitals at Vienna and Budapest.
Answer: Austria-Hungary Empire (

25. Korean activist Lee Bong-chang tried to kill this man in the Sakuradamon [[SA-koo- rad-uh-MON]] Incident. This man authorized the use of toxic gas during the Battle of Wuhan and cited the Five Charter Oath while denouncing his divinity in the Humanity Declaration. Prime Minister Hideki Tojo served, for the point, what emperor who delivered the Jewel Voice Broadcast and led Japan during World War Two?
Answer: Hirohito (

26. One ruler of this empire successfully launched the Siege of Golconda. This empire lost land during conflicts between the French and British known as the Carnatic Wars. The Red Fort was the imperial residence for rulers of this empire that was established after victory at the First Battle of Panipat. For the point, identify this Indian empire founded by Babur and once ruled by Akbar the Great.
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Mogul Empire; or Moghul Empire)

27. This country's Barakzai dynasty was toppled by a coup led by Mohammed Daoud Khan, who was later usurped in this country's Saur Revolution. Hamid Karzai was once president of this country that was invaded by the Soviets in a conflict during which Pashtun rebels joined the Mujahedeen. For the point, name this Middle Eastern country where the Taliban sieged Kabul.
Answer: (Islamic, Democratic) Republic of Afghanistan (

28. This man sent 230 military advisers to aid Agostinho [[AGG-uh-stee-nyoh]] Neto’s MPLA in the Angolan Civil War. This man led his country through the Special Period of Time and Peace after he organized a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks. This man established his country as a one-party communist state after leading an overthrow of Fulgencio Batista. For the point, name this revolutionary who led Cuba from 1959-2008.
Answer: Fidel Castro (or Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz)

29. A court painter patronized by this dynasty created the scroll painting Along the River During the Qingming [[CHING-MING]] Festival. This dynasty’s “Southern Period” began when the Jurchen Jin Dynasty conquered its capital of Kaifeng [[KYE-FEHNG]]. Inventions during this dynasty include the compass and gunpowder. For the point, name this Chinese dynasty that was conquered by the Mongols.
Answer: Song dynasty (or Sòng cháo)

30. This man was elected to his role in 1978 after his predecessor died just 33 days into his term. This man's tenure included the creation of the World Youth Day initiative. This spiritual leader was the first pope to pray at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, and the first pope born outside of Italy in more than 400 years. For the point, name this long-serving Polish pope who was canonized in 2014.
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or Karol Józef Wojtyła [[VOY-tee-wah]])

31. An attack at Nairn that preceded this battle was planned by George Murray, who attempted to recreate a similar success as at Prestonpans. The nickname "Butcher" was given to Prince William, Duke of Cumberland after this battle, which was a defeat for the Stuart royal Bonnie Prince Charlie. For the point, name this decisive battle fought in the Scottish Highlands during the 1745 Jacobite Uprising.
Answer: Battle of Culloden (

32. With Manius Acilius [[ah-KIL-ee-us]] Glabrio, this man defeated a combined Aetolian League and Seleucid army under Antiochus the Great at the 191 BC Battle of Thermopylae. This writer of the Italian historiography Origins had a "Younger" relative of the same name who opposed the rise of Caesar. The phrase "Carthago delenda est" ended all the speeches of, for the point, what Roman orator who encouraged the Third Punic War?
Answer: Cato (

33. This person included the groundbreaking "Note G" while translating an article about the “analytical machine.” For several years, this illegitimate daughter of Lord Byron corresponded with Charles Babbage and helped him refine his invention, which was then known as a "difference engine." For the point, name this woman, arguably the first computer programmer.
Answer: Ada Lovelace (

34. It's not Russia, but Jewish people in fixed income occupations known as Arendator were attacked in this state during the Khmelnytsky [[mehl-NIT-skee]] Uprising. This state lost one-third of its population during the Swedish Deluge, and this union formed after Duke Jogaila [[yah-GEH-wah]] married Queen Jadwiga [[yahd-WEE-gah]]. The cities of Krakow and Warsaw served as the capital of, for the point, what early modern state which experienced three partitions?
Answer: Poland-Lithuania (

35. Following this war, the "Three No's" was put forth, which refused to trade, recognize, or declare peace with an adversarial neighbor. The three-year long War of Attrition followed this war's swift conclusion, with Gamal Abdel Nasser supporting low-intensity warfare in the occupied Sinai Peninsula. The long-lasting occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip occurred after, for the point, what short-lived war between Israel and its Arab neighbors in the 1960s?
Answer: Six-Day War (

36. An attack on the Bonanza mine in this country was overseen by a man who, while visiting Mexico, established close ties with the Salvadoran revolutionary Farabundo Marti. Jose Maria Moncada and Adolfo Diaz served as leaders of this country, the latter of whom granted the U.S. rights to build a canal through its namesake lake. For the point, guerillas loyal to Augusto Sandinho, the Sandinistas, operated in what Central American country southeast of Honduras?
Answer: Republic of Nicaragua (

37. During this man’s reign, the alimenta, a welfare program that helped orphans and poor children, was formed and funded by putting mortgages on farms throughout Italy. This man sacked Ctesiphon, capital of the Parthian Empire, and commemorated his victory against the Dacians [[DAY-shuns]] in a namesake "Column." For the point, name this second of the Five Good Emperors, declared the “best ruler” by the Roman Senate.
Answer: Trajan (or Caesar Nerva Traianus

38. This man once set his boat, the Tigris, on fire off the coast of Djibouti to protest war in the Middle East. One book by this man describes another expedition that sailed from Morocco to Barbados and was named after the Egyptian deity Ra. For the point, name this Norwegian adventurer and experimental archeologist whose travels across the Pacific in a balsa wood raft are chronicled in the book Kon-Tiki.
Answer: Thor Heyerdahl

39. A nation in what is now this country defeated Leopold the Just in the 14th-century Battle of Sempach. Allied forces in this country put down a separatist revolt in the Sonderbund War. In 1979, this country's region of Jura became its newest canton. For the point, identify this Central European country whose permanent neutrality was granted at the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Switzerland (or Swiss Confederation

40. This man, who may have coined the term "Armchair General," assisted in organizing the Convention of Tauroggen, which created an anti-Napoleonic coalition in 1812. This man described the uncertainty of ongoing battles as the "Fog of War," and he said, "War was the Continuation of Politics by another means." For the point, name this 19th century German military theorist who wrote On War.
Answer: Karl von Clausewitz (or Carl Philipp Gottfried (or Gottlieb) von Clausewitz

41. Thanks to this man’s connection with Maximilian I, he was given possession of the County of Kirchberg. This man funded Charles V's election as Holy Roman Emperor and built a namesake chapel in St. Anne's Church, as well as the oldest social housing project in the world. For the point, name this German banker and merchant, considered the richest man in early modern Europe.
Answer: Jakob Fugger of the Lily (

42. Tracts known as “Communal Areas” were claimed for resettlement purposes as part of a mass land redistribution campaign in this country during the 2000s. An image of a sign reading “Starving Billionaire” was used by media outlets to bring attention to hyperinflation in this country whose longtime ruler was in power from 1987 to 2017. Former vice president Emmerson Mnangagwa [[mm-nahn-GAH-gwah]] has governed this country since 2017. For the point, name this African country once led by Robert Mugabe.
Answer: Republic of Zimbabwe (or Nyika yeZimbabwe)

43. The Earl of Arran served as regent for this person, who faced the Chaseabout raid. This wife of Lord Darnley may have recorded her guilt in a conspiracy with the Earl of Bothwell in the Casket Letters. Francis Walsingham implicated this woman in that conspiracy, which was known as the Babington Plot. For the point, name this Queen of Scotland who was executed by Elizabeth I.
Answer: Mary, Queen of Scots (

44. This woman, who served as assistant to Official Party Photographer Heinrich Hoffman, supposedly overrode armament minister Albert Speer's call for a ban on women's luxury goods in 1943. The only time this woman appeared in official press photographs was during the 1936 Berlin Olympics. For the point, name this mistress-turned-wife of Adolf Hitler, whose life ended alongside him in the Fuhrerbunker.
Answer: Eva Braun (or Eva Anna Paula Braun

45. This civilization’s Phaistos Disc is an early example of typographic print and is inscribed with symbols similar to this civilization’s undeciphered language, Linear A. An eruption on Thera made this civilization vulnerable to the Mycenaeans, who succeeded them as the dominant civilization on Crete. For the point, name this early Greek civilization whose namesake king built the Labyrinth.
Answer: Minoan Civilization (

46. During this period, an outnumbered Polish force partially composed of Hussars defeated Dmitry Shuisky at the Battle of Klushino. The Treaty of Stolvobo ended this period and ceded the province of Ingria to Gustavus Adolphus. This period is generally considered to have ended with the rise of Michael I. The death of Boris Godunov began, for the point, what tumultuous period of 16th and 17th century Russia?
Answer: Time of Troubles (

47. Before this event, Olympic gold-medalist Terry McDermott posed for a photo pretending to cut the hair of one of the performers. A caption read “SORRY GIRLS, HE’S MARRIED” when introducing one performer during this event. The music video for the Outkast song “Hey Ya!” was inspired by this landmark televised event. Sparking the start of the “British Invasion,” for the point, what 1964 event televised the debut of a Liverpool band to American audiences?
Answer: The Beatles

48. A claimant to this position from the House of Aberffraw died while attempting to escape the Tower of London after falling from a knotted rope. The last native ruler to hold this title, Llywelyn [[loo-EL-len]], died while fighting the English during the Battle of Orewin Bridge. For the point, name this title now held by Charles of Edinburgh, traditionally held by the heir apparent to the British throne.
Answer: Prince of Wales (

49. In this region, Hamilton Disston purchased over four million acres of land near St. Cloud to build canals. One book about this region is subtitled River of Grass and was written by Marjory Stoneman Douglass. This region's drainage was accelerated under the administration of Governor Napoleon Bonaparte Broward. Home to the assimilated Seminole people, for the point, what is this large region of marshy wetlands in South Florida?
Answer: The Everglades (

50. Alexander the Great prayed for this deity to cast a four-horse chariot before heading to the Battle of Issus. This god’s temple in the city of Mantinea was restored by Hadrian while another temple on Cape Sounion was strategically placed in view of all incoming and exiting ships. For the point, who is the Greek god of horses, storms, and the sea?
Answer: Poseidon (do not

51. During his exile, this leader received the backing of Haitian president Alexandre Pétion. While leading the Admirable Campaign, this man joined the army of the United Provinces and issued The Decree of War to the Death, which permitted the murder of Spanish-born civilians who did not actively support his cause. For the point, name this president of Gran Colombia, known to some as "The Liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

52. The USS Lexington raided this archipelago after three American ships were captured in a seal hunting dispute. An undeclared war over this archipelago and the South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands was fought when Leopoldo Galtieri claimed sovereignty over Las Islas Malvinas. For the point, name this island chain fought over in a 1982 war between Argentina and the United Kingdom.
Answer: Falkland Islands (

53. A fleet led by this man and the Earl of Cumberland captured the Portuguese vessel Madre de Deus. This man lost favor with the monarchy through a secret marriage to lady-in- waiting Elizabeth Throckmorton. During a voyage to find El Dorado, this man violated the terms of his release from the Tower of London and was summarily executed. For the point, identify this explorer, a favorite of Elizabeth I.
Answer: Sir Walter Raleigh

54. Antoine Watteau depicted French aristocrats traveling to this figure's home in Pilgrimage to Cythera. Ancient Greek artist Zeuxis [[ZOOK-siss]] supposedly died laughing after casting an old woman to model this figure. Titian painted a reclining nude of this figure at the behest of his patron, the Duke of Urbino. For the point, name this Greco-Roman goddess whose "Birth" is depicted in a Botticelli work.
Answer: Aphrodite (

55. An officer of these military units known as the Towarzysz [[tah-WAHR-zeez]] wore a leopard pelt over his shoulder when riding into battle. Jan Sobieski led a decisive charge of these cavalrymen into the Ottoman line during the 1683 Siege of Vienna. For the point, name this variant of Polish shock cavalry that became a common light cavalry unit in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Answer: Hussars (

56. This empire came into conflict with the New Kingdom of Egypt after the death of Prince Zannanza. This empire suffered a major defeat by the Assyrian empire at the Battle of Nihriya, and this empire ended after invasions by the Kaskas, Phrygians, and Bryges. The city of Hattusa was the capital of, for the point, what empire in modern-day Turkey that lost to Ramses the Great in the Battle of Kadesh?
Answer: Hittite Empire (or Hittites

57. This country was invaded by France in the Pastry War. The Archduke Maximilian attempted to proclaim himself emperor of this country. The leader of this country's resistance during one war was Benito Juárez, and Antonio López lost the northern half of this country's territory. For the point, name this country that lost California to the U.S., and lost the Texas Revolution under Santa Anna.
Answer: Mexico (

58. The worst maritime disaster in history occurred in this body of water when the Wilhelm Gustloff sunk, killing around 9,000 people. The Cap Arcona sunk in this sea while full of concentration camp prisoners. The Battle of the Sound took place on this sea whose southern shore was home to the Teutonic Knights. The Swedish Empire once controlled much of, for the point, what Scandinavian sea that is connected to the Atlantic Ocean via the Øresund?
Answer: Baltic Sea

59. During this politician’s reelection campaign, the phrase “guns, goons, and gold” was used by the media to describe his corrupt tactics. Corazon Aquino succeeded this person as president, ending a 20-year administration hallmarked by stealing upward of ten billion dollars from his nation alongside his wife, Imelda. For the point, name this authoritarian tenth president of the Philippines.
Answer: Ferdinand Marcos (or Ferdinand Emmanuel Edralin Marcos Sr.)

60. After failing to capture Masyaf, this ruler allied with Sinān and his Assassins. This ruler agreed not to fire upon a tower where a marriage was taking place in the Siege of Kerak. This ruler undermined the Fatimid Caliphate after succeeding his uncle, Shirkuh. This ruler had Raynald of Chatillon executed after winning the Battle of Hattin. For the point, name this founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and opponent of Richard the Lionheart in the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (or Al-Nasir Salah al-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub; or Salah ad-Din)

61. This industrial site on the Macondo Prospect suffered a 2010 explosion that claimed eleven lives and injured seventeen others. An explosion on this object resulted in the spilling of 200 million gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico. For the point, name this BP semi- submersible offshore drilling rig south of Louisiana, the destruction of which created the greatest marine oil spill in history.
Answer: Deepwater Horizon

62. Following the death of this organization's leader, Sextus Afranius Burris, it split into two factions which supported or opposed Piso's conspiracy. Previous leaders of this organization included Sejanus [[seh-JAY-nuhs]], who rivaled Emperor Tiberius for power. This organization originally protected important judges and generals who ranked just below consuls. For the point, name this group that evolved into bodyguards and kingmakers for the Roman emperor.
Answer: Praetorian Guard (or Cohortes Praetoriae)

63. This person led the rescue of 37 children from a bombed psychiatric hospital during the Siege of Beirut. A prominent critic of this person was Christopher Hitchens, who called her “a fanatic, a fundamentalist, and a fraud” after she was beatified by John Paul II in 2003. The winner of the 1979 Nobel Peace Prize, for the point, what Roman Catholic nun was the founder of the Order of the Missionaries of Charity?
Answer: Mother Teresa (or Anjezë Gonxhe Bonaxhiu; or Mother Mary Teresa Bojaxhiu; or Saint Teresa of Calcutta)

64. Aboard his ship La Loba, Marquess Álvaro de Bazán [[AHL-vah-roh deh bah-ZAHN]] commanded the reserve fleet in this battle, saving the right wing under Andrea Doria from breaking. During this battle, Ali Pasha was killed and had his head presented to Don John, the illegitimate son of Charles V. The use of the heavier galleasses by the Venetian-led Holy League led to, for the point, what 1571 naval victory by allied Christian forces over the Ottoman Empire?
Answer: Battle of Lepanto

65. This group was led by Brendan Burns during an ambush that killed 50 soldiers at Narrow Water Castle. Anthony Berry was among the victims of the Brighton hotel bombing that was executed by this group during a failed attempt to assassinate Margaret Thatcher. Responsible for the assassination of Lord Mountbatten in 1979, for the point, what organization’s goal was to drive out the British presence from Northern Ireland?
Answer: IRA (or Irish Republican Army; or Provisional Irish Republican Army

66. Friedrich Engels called one of this man’s ideas “the crudest, most barbarous theory that ever existed.” The Census Act of 1800 was passed two years after the publication of this man’s most noted book, in which he claimed agricultural production would not keep up with another metric. For the point, what 18th and 19th century economist predicted catastrophic population growth in his book, An Essay on the Principle of Population?
Answer: Thomas Malthus (Thomas Robert Malthus

67. Emperor Kanmu moved his capital from Nara to the Daidairi Palace in this city, beginning the Heian Period. The Battle of Toba-Fushimi occurred in a field between this city and Osaka. Following the Battle of Sekigahara, Shogun Tokugawa moved his capital from this city to Edo. For the point, name this cultural capital of Japan, replaced as the seat of government in 1603 by Tokyo.
Answer: Kyoto (

68. Along with Charles Drummond Ellis and Ernest Rutherford, this scientist co-authored Radiations from Radioactive Substances. This scientist wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report and led the British team on the Manhattan Project. The experiment in which alpha particles produced no charge when passing through beryllium foil and paraffin wax was conducted by, for the point, what physicist who discovered the neutron?
Answer: James Chadwick

69. At the age of 60, this nation's vice president, Ronnie Brunswijk [[BROONS-wike]], put himself in during a CONCACAF [[KON-kah-kaff]] soccer match against the club C.D. Olimpia. That politician serves under a president of Indian descent, Chan Santokhi, who heads the Progressive Reform Party. The Treaty of Breda between the British and United Provinces traded sovereignty over New York for this modern South American nation. Brutal dictator Dési Bouterse [[BAO-ter-suh]] ruled, for the point, what former colony of the Netherlands in South America?
Answer: Republic of Suriname (or Republiek Suriname)

70. In this battle, the namesake of an American brand of scotch, Johnnie Walker, earned the first convoy victory while captaining the HMS Audacity. The disorganization of the Allied resistance led to the "Second Happy Time" during this naval battle in which the Regia Marina and the Kriegsmarine operated largely unimpeded. The longest continuous battle of World War Two was, for the point, which naval campaign named for a major ocean?
Answer: Battle of the Atlantic

71. "Bandits led by monks" were blamed for a defeat in this country at Bailén, which Chilean soldiers referenced at Maipú [[mah-ee-POO]]. A Supreme Central and Governing Junta ruled this country during its occupation. This country was briefly ruled by Napoleon's brother, Joseph Bonaparte. A king of this country abdicated at Bayonne after incidents at Aranjuez [[ah-RAHN-hwez]] and El Escorial [[eh-skohr-ree-AHL]]. For the point, name this country where most of the Peninsular War was fought.
Answer: Kingdom of Spain (or Reino de España)

72. Congress passed the Maypenny Agreement and the “Sell or Starve” Act less than a year after this battle. Despite assisting a battalion led by Marcus Reno, Frederick William Benteen received criticism after this battle for failing to join a lieutenant colonel in a surprise attack. Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull defeated the 7th Calvary Regiment in, for the point, what 1876 battle that was a part of the Great Sioux War, known as “Custer’s Last Stand”?
Answer: Battle of the Little Bighorn (or Battle of the Greasy Grass

73. Following this treaty, power was placed in the hands of the volksdeutsche [[VOLKS- doytch-eh]] elite in the newly created United Baltic Duchy and Kingdom of Lithuania. This 1918 treaty, which is named for a Belorussian city, was invalidated by the Treaty of Versailles. The newly-formed Soviet Union negotiated with the Central Powers, for the point, what treaty that allowed Russia to exit World War One?
Answer: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk

74. This composer wrote an overture for a three-day festival in the presence of Edward VII [[the Seventh]] and Queen Alexandra titled In the South. For a memorial concert following the sinking of the Titanic, this composer conducted one of his own pieces that depicts his wife, Alice. This composer's Cello Concerto in E Minor was revived following a recording by Jacqueline du Pré. Composers still try to find the solution to a mysterious theme in, for the point, what English composer's Enigma Variations?
Answer: Edward William Elgar

75. This former country's monarch was chosen by seven Prince-Electors, including three archbishops and the King of Bohemia. Austria influenced this loose collection of states under the Hapsburgs, whose control was weakened after the Peace of Westphalia. The Thirty Years' War was centered in, for the point, what empire that was last led by Francis II and first led by Charlemagne?
Answer: Holy Roman Empire (

76. After this structure was built, its commissioner was put under house arrest by his son, Aurangzeb, until his death in 1666. A controversy was raised in 2017 when this building was excluded from tourism materials produced in Uttar Pradesh as officials deemed this building's Mughal builders were "traitors." Built as a memorial for his wife, Mumtaz, for the point, what 17th century mausoleum was commissioned by Emperor Shah Jahan in Agra, India?
Answer: Taj Mahal

77. A 15th-century text partially titled for these people by Christine de Pizan sings the praises of exemplary members such as Zenobia and Semiramis [[seh-mee-RAH-miss]]. Albertus Magnus wrote a particularly inept and misleading treatise titled On the Secrets of [these people], perhaps inspired by his vow to celibacy. For the point, name this group of people who held medieval occupations like alewives and nuns.
Answer: Women (

78. The protagonist Mugo becomes a hero of this movement after undertaking a hunger strike in a detention center in the novel A Grain of Wheat by native son Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o [[neh-GOO-gee wah-tee-AHN-goh]]. Members of this Kikuyu-dominated political movement were targeted in the Hola massacre after being clubbed to death by British guards. Operation Anvil depopulated Nairobi of, for the point, what political faction which vied for Kenyan independence?
Answer: Mau Mau movement (or Mau Mau Rebellion

79. This man, who authored the pamphlet "King Leopold's Soliloquy" about the Congo Free State, served as vice-president of the American Anti-Imperialist League. In a novel, this author wrote about a boy who encounters the Duke and the Dauphin [[doh-FAHN]] while traveling down the Mississippi with an enslaved man named Jim. Southern antebellum society inspired, for the point, what author to write The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn?
Answer: Mark Twain (

80. The first meeting of the Hellenic League was held at this city, which sometimes gives the league its name. The King's Peace ended a war named for this city that broke out shortly after the Peloponnesian War and pitted Sparta against a Greek-Persian alliance. Tyrants such as Periander of the Cypselid dynasty ruled, for the point, what Greek city that hosted the Isthmian Games?
Answer: Corinth (or Kórinthos

81. Muralist David Alfaro Siqueiros [[see-KEH-rohss]] made an attempt at this action with NKVD agent Joseph Grigulevich, resulting in the target's nephew, Esteban, being shot in the foot. A Spanish-born agent successfully committed this action, for which he was awarded the Order of Lenin by Leonid Brezhnev [[BRESH-nehf]]. Ramón Mercader [[rah-MOHN mehr- KAH-dehr]] used an ice-axe to commit, for the point, what 1940 hit-job on a rival of Joseph Stalin in Mexico?
Answer: Assassination of Leon Trotsky (

82. Two answers required. The de-escalation of an arms race between these two countries was a goal of the Pacts of May. During the Baltimore Crisis, a minister in one of these countries offered the U.S. access to a base in Salta in order to attack the other. During the Snipe incident, the navy of one of these countries attacked the other's lighthouse in the Beagle Channel. For the point, name these two countries which fought over colonization of Patagonia.
Answer: Argentina and Chile (

83. The discreteness with which one event was undertaken has cast doubt on the claim that this quote was actually said, though its speaker otherwise notified groups about the presence of “Regulars.” This quote is notably omitted from a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow set during the event in which it was allegedly repeated. Attributed to a silversmith, for the point, what was this phrase legendarily yelled out during the midnight ride of Paul Revere?
Answer: "The British are Coming!"

84. This war's Treaty of London gave back the region of Venetia and Frulia to the Kingdom of Italy. One side's deployment of infantry wielding needle guns allowed Helmuth von Moltke's forces to outgun their opponent in this war's Battle of Königgrätz [[KEHR-nih- grahts]]. A dispute over Schleswig-Holstein led to, for the point, what war between the North German Confederation and the Habsburg monarchy?
Answer: Austro-Prussian War (

85. This country celebrates the Anniversary of the No, which commemorates this country’s rejection of an ultimatum and subsequent entry into World War Two. This country was invaded in Operation Marita after its forces liberated the city of Korçë [[KART-shuh]] and the region of Epirus [[ih-"PIE"-russ]]. Benito Mussolini launched a failed invasion of this country, which was led by Ioannis Metaxas [[yoh-AH-niss meh-TUK-sass]]. For the point, in which European nation did German troops raise a Nazi flag on the Acropolis?
Answer: Greece (or Hellenic Republic; or Elliniki Dimokratia; or Ellas; or Ellada

86. The Minister for the Environment of this nation was taken to court by a group of teenagers and a nun to halt the expansion of the Vickery coal mine. Alex Hawke rejected an athlete’s visa to this country because he was “a talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment.” Novak Djokovic [[JOH-koh-vitch]] was deported from, for the point, what country led by Prime Minister Scott Morrison?
Answer: Commonwealth of Australia

87. This man's tombstone, which reads "Ungrateful fatherland, you will not even have my bones," was erected due to bitterness at his exile from Rome after being falsely charged with taking bribes from Antiochus the Great. The death of this man's father at Upper Baetis by Hasdrubal prompted this general to undertake the Hispania campaign of the Second Punic War. For the point, name this victor at Zama who was given the honorific Africanus.
Answer: Scipio Africanus the Elder (or Scipio Africanus Major

88. In the film Spencer, Princess Diana envisions the ghost of this person in place of Queen Elizabeth II during a Christmas dinner at Sandringham. This person’s demise was depicted in a 2008 film after Jane Parker claims that this woman was having an incestuous affair with her brother, George. For the point, who was the second wife of King Henry VIII [[the Eighth]], ultimately beheaded on charges of adultery and treason?
Answer: Anne Boleyn (

89. This organization successfully orchestrated the death of Ali Hassan Salameh, the Red Prince, during the larger "Operation Wrath of God." This agency undertook an extrajudicial operation which captured and led to the execution of Adolf Eichmann after he was discovered hiding in Argentina. For the point, name this intelligence agency of the State of Israel.
Answer: Mossad

90. This man was said to have saved three innocent men from execution by pushing the executioner’s sword to the ground. One tradition observed in the Netherlands during this man’s “Feast” involves children putting carrots and hay in their shoes as gifts for his horse. For the point, what Bishop of Myra is the patron saint of children and the inspiration for Santa Claus?
Answer: Saint Nicholas of Myra (or Nicholas of Bari; or Sint-Nicolaas; or Sankt Nikolaus

91. During this event, Prime Minister of Canada Joe Clark allowed an Order of Council letting Canadian passports be issued to some American citizens. Operation Eagle Claw was a failed attempt to end this event, which was perpetrated by a Muslim student organization under the influence of Ayatollah Khomeini. The Election of Ronald Reagan influenced the end of, for the point, which "Crisis" caused by a takeover of the U.S. embassy in Tehran?
Answer: Iran Hostage Crisis

92. Some of the clauses in a “Protocol” ending this conflict included an apology to the German emperor for Baron von Ketteler’s assassination and the destruction of the Taku Forts. This conflict was formally ordered by Empress Dowager Cixi [[SEE-SHEE]]. Won by the Eight- Nation Alliance, for the point, what anti-foreign “Rebellion” in China was named after the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists?
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (or Boxer Uprising; or Boxer Resurrection; or Yihetuan Movement)

93. This city hosted the Red Bull Stratos in which Austrian skydiver Felix Baumgartner flew 24 miles into the stratosphere. A report by the United States Air Force explained that debris found in this city was a Project Mogul balloon that crashed in the desert. With a little green man and a flying saucer depicted on its seal, for the point, what city in New Mexico supposedly experienced UFO sightings in 1947?
Answer: Roswell, New Mexico

94. Most of Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur [[dahr-TUHR]] was likely written at one of these locations. The protagonist's mother "pleads the belly" while at one of these places in Moll Flanders. A resident of one of these places wrote a letter to the son of the Marquess of Queensbury and a poem that notes, "Each man kills the thing he loves." For the point, name these locations about which Oscar Wilde wrote while facing punishment for homosexuality.
Answer: Prisons (

95. Much of this nation's territory was gained from the Tati Concessions by Matabele king Lobengula [[loh-BEN-goo-lah]] for arms and gold bullion. Stellaland was a failed Boer state established in this modern-day nation, which was supported by the Transvaal Republic until the Warren Expedition captured Mafeking [[mah-feh-KING]]. Most of Namibia's Herero people fled to this modern nation after facing systemic genocide by German occupiers. Known as Bechuanaland under British colonial rule, for the point, what is this African nation governed from Gabarone?
Answer: Republic of Botswana (or Lefatshe la Botswana

96. The aria "Dovunque [[doh-VOON-keh]] al Mondo" features motifs of the "Star- Spangled Banner" in this opera. That motif in this opera accompanies a character who marries Kate, prompting the protagonist to give her son an American flag and kill herself. For the point, name this Giacomo Puccini opera about a woman who marries American Lieutenant B.F. Pinkerton, Cio-Cio [[CHO-CHO]] San.
Answer: Madama Butterfly (

97. Rear Admiral William Caperton's threats to bombard this city led the government of Desiderio Arias to flee, leading to an eight-year U.S. occupation. U.S. agents supported Joaquín Balaguer [[wah-KEEN bah-lah-GEHR]] loyalists who fought for control of this city after the death of a leader who committed the Parsley Massacre. For the point, name this city from which Rafael Trujillo [[troo-HEE-yoh]] ruled the Dominican Republic.
Answer: Santo Domingo

98. While facing a paternity suit against Joan Berry, this man was charged by the FBI under J. Edgar Hoover with violating the Mann Act. After over twenty years of exile, this person returned to the United States in 1972 to accept an Honorary Oscar. For the point, what British silent film actor is best known for films such as City Lights, Modern Times, and The Great Dictator?
Answer: Charlie Chaplin (or Charles Spencer Chaplin Jr.)

99. This man outfitted a luxury train that ran from his capital to the coastal town of Bar. The Mitrokhin Archive outed an attempt to kill this man by KGB agents who were armed with a powdered form of the Plague. The Vatican excommunicated this man for executing former Ustaše [[oo-stah-SHAY]] members. This man dogmatically split from Stalin after the USSR failed to back his acquisition of Trieste. For the point, name this Cold War dictator of Yugoslavia.
Answer: Josef Broz Tito (

100. This person said he “acted in good faith” after the Chilcot Report exposed his initial downplay of the war in Iraq. This man and Bertie Ahern signed the Good Friday Agreement less than a year into his premiership. Described as being George W. Bush’s “poodle”, for the point, what Labour Party leader was prime minister of the United Kingdom from 1997 to 2007?
Answer: Tony Blair (or Anthony Charles Lynton Blair)

101. A song created by Theocritus [[thee-AH-krih-tuss]] as a wedding commemoration includes the line, “Reverence me. I am [this woman’s] tree.” This woman was believed to have been buried in the town of Therapne, in which she shares a shrine with Menelaus. For the point, what woman in Greek mythology was known as “the face that launched a thousand ships,” whose elopement with Paris caused the Trojan War?
Answer: Helen of Troy

102. A person was charged in these events after a woman named Mercy Lewis claimed she couldn’t unclasp her hands. These events were recorded in a book titled Wonders of the Invisible World by Cotton Mather. Mary Eastey, Rebecca Nurse, and John Proctor were some of the victims of, for the point, what 1692 “trials” that caused a mass hysteria in Massachusetts over the presence of supernatural beings?
Answer: Salem witch trials (

103. Beginning in the Shari Naw neighborhood of this city, the Saur Revolution overthrew Mohammed Daoud Khan and killed him after he refused to pledge allegiance to the Soviet aligned Communist Party. A mid-1990s siege of this city culminated in the hanging of former president Mohammad Najibullah outside the Arg Presidential Palace. The Taliban retook, for the point, what capital of Afghanistan in 2021?
Answer: Kabul

104. French astronomer Jacques du Chevreul [[doo-shev-RUHL]] rejected this man’s claim that Mars was located under the sun. This astronomer wrote the poem Elegy to Dania after being exiled by (+) Christian IV. Johannes Kepler used observational data collected by this astronomer in the Rudolphine Tables. Known for his metallic (*) nose, for the point, what Danish astronomer is also known for his accurate and comprehensive observations made without the use of a telescope?
Answer: Tycho Brahe (or Tyge Ottesen Brahe)

105. This man willingly disbanded loyal legions in 79 B.C. to retire to the countryside in Puteoli. This enemy of the (+) populares was vital in defeating the Numidian king, Jugurtha, but his superior, Gaius (*) Marius, controversially took credit for the victory. For the point, name this two-time consul and dictator of Rome whose violent purges paved the way for Julius Caesar's rise to power during the Late Republic.
Answer: Sulla (or Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix)

106. In a novel from this country, theorists speculate that the Soviet Union is represented by a vast ocean of gel that covers the planet of Solaris. Olga (+) Tokarczuk [[toh-KAHR-chuk]] is from this country, as is the author of a novel about Lygia and Marcus Vinicius subtitled "A Narrative of the Time (*) of Nero." For the point, name this home country of Stanisław Lem and Quo Vadis author Henryk Sienkiewicz [[SYEN-keyh-vits]].
Answer: Republic of Poland (or Rzeczpospolita Polska)

107. This fruit of Indo-Malayan origin names an Indian Ocean island group controlled by Australia which is sometimes named for Captain William Keeling. The crew (+) of patrol torpedo boat PT-109, led by John F. Kennedy, built dugout canoes of this fruit's husk while stranded on Olasana Island. A type of "Milk" and (*) "Oil" can be derived from, for the point, what tropical fruit first described to Europeans by Antonio Pigafetta?
Answer: Coconut (

108. This member of the Order of Santiago was noted for his cruelty, including the 1502 burning and looting of a ship full of Muslim pilgrims traveling to Mecca. This (+) man's discoveries are celebrated in Luis de Camões's [[kah-MOYSH-es]] The Lusiads, and this man died of Malaria off the Malabar (*) Coast. For the point, name this Portuguese explorer, the first European to make a sea voyage to India.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

109. This people migrated to Persia after their leader had a falling out with Yabghu [[YAHB-goo]] and subsequently separated from the (+) Oghuz. In Persia, this group of people defeated the Ghaznavid [[gahs-NAH-vid]] army at both the Battle of Nasa plains and the Battle of (*) Dandanaqan [[dan-DAN-uh-kun]]. For the point, name this Sunni Muslim dynasty that established a namesake empire under Toghrul I, as well as the Sultanate of Rum, both of which were targets of the First Crusade.
Answer: Seljuk dynasty (or Seljuks; or Seljukids

110. Immediately following this battle, Earl Morcar of Northumbria threw his support behind Edgar the Aethling, who was elected king by the Witenagemot. Edgar (+) succeeded one man who was legendarily killed by an arrow to the eye in this battle, which he fought shortly after defeating Harald Hardrada at the Battle of Stamford (*) Bridge. Depicted in the Bayeux [[bah-YOU]] Tapestry, for the point, what is this 1066 battle that decided the crown of England for William the Conqueror?
Answer: Battle of Hastings

111. Soviet engineers accidentally caused the Darvaza gas crater in this nation, a continuous burning methane site in the Karakorum Desert. The Rukhnama, (+) or "Book of Soul," was a propaganda work written by a former head of this state, Saparmurat Niyazov. A personality cult was built by (*) Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow [[gur-bahn-GOO-lee behr-"MUHAMMAD"-ohv]], the former president of, for the point, which Central Asian nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkmenistan

112. Senator and rebel leader Prince Y. Johnson captured a man in this position and videotaped himself drinking beer while that man in this position had his ears cut off. Former AC Milan (+) footballer George Weah [[WEE-uh]] entered this office in 2018 after defeating the incumbent, the first woman to hold this position, Ellen Johnson (*) Sirleaf. Former Virginia slave Joseph Jenkins Roberts was the first to hold, for the point, what position that resides in the Executive Mansion in Monrovia?
Answer: President of the Republic of Liberia

113. A French pioneer of this philosophy, Peter Abelard, wrote the first autobiography in Western Europe, titled History of my Misfortunes. The (+) originator of the ontological argument, Anselm of Canterbury, is considered the father of this school of philosophy. Thomas Aquinas (*) was a practitioner of, for the point, what medieval school of philosophy that attempted to harmonize Aristotle and Catholic doctrine, the dominant school in Europe from 1100 to 1700?
Answer: Scholasticism (or the Scholastics)

114. This man allegedly helped cure the ergotism of two noblemen, which led to that disease being referred to as this man’s “fire.” Athanasius (+) of Alexandria wrote a biography of this man, who attempted to hide in a cave to escape a group of demons. This man withdrew to a mountain by the Nile in order to lead an (*) ascetic life. For the point, name this Egyptian "Desert Father" often referred to as the “Father of All Monks.”
Answer: Saint Anthony the Great (or Anthony of Egypt; or Anthony the Abbot; or Anthony of the Desert; or Anthony the Anchorite; or Anthony the Hermit; or Anthony of Thebes

115. This man’s flight to Diggers Rest was falsely reported as the first aerial flight in Australia. A (+) challenge by the Daily Mirror resulted in this man weeping after taking a full hour to escape from specially made (*) handcuffs. For the point, what Hungarian- American illusionist was famous for his ability to escape from chains, milk cans, and straight jackets?
Answer: Harry Houdini (or Erik Weisz)

116. This leader, who opened the Whampoa Military Academy, governed under the Three Principles of the People. Following the Xinhai [[SHIN-HYE]] Revolution, this man ceded power to the warlord Yuan (+) Shikai. This leader's death fractured the First United Front and led to the civil war between the Communist Party and the (*) Kuomintang. For the point, name this "Father of the Nation" and first provisional president of the Republic of China.
Answer: Sun Yat-Sen (or Sun Deming

117. Paul Crowther was convicted of assaulting this man with a milkshake for, he claimed, "spouting bile and racism." This man was challenged to a sword duel by Polish aristocrat John (+) Zylinski due to his comments over Eastern European immigrants. This man nearly died in 2010 after a pro-United Kingdom Independence Party banner was caught in the tailplane of the small aircraft in which he was traveling. The Euroskeptic (*) "Brexit Party" was founded by, for the point, which British right-wing populist politician?
Answer: Nigel Farage [["FAIR"-ahzh]] (or Nigel Paul Farage)

118. This work was restored by Juan García de Miranda after it was damaged in a fire at the Alcázar. A figure in this painting was misidentified as Maria (+) Theresa when it was inventoried at the Madrid Royal Palace. Viewed from the lenses of Mariana of Austria and Philip (*) IV, for the point, what 1656 painting by Diego Velázquez depicts the Infanta Margarita surrounded by her ladies-in-waiting?
Answer: Las Meninas

119. This subject of a 2020 bestseller by Larry Tye was associated with a movement which William F. Buckley claimed “men of … stern morality can close ranks" behind. One (+) president claimed that he "will not get into the gutter with [this man]," whose popularity plummeted after he was asked “have you no sense of decency, sir” during a set of (*) hearings. For the point, name this Wisconsin senator and anti-communist who fueled the Second Red Scare.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy

120. This deity was likely combined with the war god Wepwawet, and this deity helped Isis embalm Osiris in one myth. Priests of this deity conducted the Opening of the (+) Mouth Ceremony which prepared the spirit for the "weighing of the hearts" conducted by this deity, according to the Book of the (*) Dead. For the point, name this Ancient Egyptian jackal-headed god of death whose worship was an integral part of the mummification process.
Answer: Anubis (or Inpu; or Anpu)

121. This man won a wrestling match after being challenged by King Henry VIII during the negotiation of the Field of the Cloth of (+) Gold. This king, who was known as the "Knight-King," was captured by condiotierro Cesare Hercolani during the Battle of (*) Pavia. For the point, name this 16th century King of France, a member of the House of Valois [[vah-LWAH]].
Answer: Francis I (

122. During a rap battle, this man tells his opponent, “You died owning slaves. I died setting men free.” In (+) that same episode of Epic Rap Battles of History, George Washington asks this man, “How’d you get beat by a dude named (*) Longshanks?” For the point, what nationalist fought in the First War of Scottish Independence and was played by Mel Gibson in the film Braveheart?
Answer: William Wallace

123. This composer was exiled prior to the premier of one of his operas after he took part in the May Uprising. It is believed that Felix (+) Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer were targets of this composer’s ant-semitic essay Jewishness in Music. Claimed to have been Adolf Hitler’s (*) favorite, for the point, what German composer’s works include Tannhäuser [[TON-hoy-zer]], Lohengrin, and The Ring of the Nibelung?
Answer: Richard Wagner [[VAHG-nuh]] (or Wilhelm Richard Wagner

124. In 2019, this man's remains were exhumed from the Valle de los Caídos [[VYE- yeh deh los kye-EE-dohss]] and reburied in his wife's mausoleum in Mingorrubio (+) Cemetery. Despite being supported by the Condor Legion in a civil war, this man kept2022 Asian Championships History Bee Finals his country neutral during World (*) War Two. In 1969, this man named Prince Juan Carlos as his heir apparent. For the point, name this man who ruled as Generalissimo of Spain between 1936 and 1975.
Answer: Francisco Franco Bahamonde

125. A trip to Crete inspired the semi-mythical figure Lycurgus [[lye-KUR-guss]] to introduce this system, including the use of a common mess hall and a restriction on (+) bathing. This system, which was often led by more experienced men known as paidonomoi, was chronicled by the Athenian Xenophon, who put his own sons into this program while serving as a mercenary. The youth of (*) Sparta were subjected to, for ten points, what twenty year program of militaristic training?
Answer: Agoge [[ah-GOH-gay]] (or Agōgā)

126. Operation Paget [[PAH-jet]] was an inquiry established in 2004 to investigate conspiracy theories about this event. Trevor Rees-Jones survived while both Henri (+) Paul and Dodi Fayed [[DOH-dee fye-ED]] died in this event, which was originally blamed on aggressive (*) paparazzi. For the point, what tragic 1997 event involved a royal in a car accident in the Pont de l’Alma tunnel in Paris, France?
Answer: Death of Diana, Princess of Wales (

127. This battle was codenamed Operation Watch on the Rhine by the German military. The city of (+) Bastogne was a key objective in this battle, during which one commander responded with the word “Nuts” when asked to surrender. One of the objectives of this battle was to capture the port of (*) Antwerp, and this battle took place in the Ardennes Forest. For the point, name this battle, the final major German offensive of World War Two.
Answer: Battle of the Bulge (

128. The Ninth of September Front opposed an independence movement for this island led by George Grivas known as EOKA [[ee-OH-kah]]. The nationalist (+) Nikos Sampson was installed as the leader of this island after a coup ousted Makarios [[mah- KAH-ree-ohss]] III. That coup was followed by a 1974 invasion of this country codenamed Operation (*) Atilla. For the point, name this island divided between a Turkish northern half and a Greek southern half and governed from Nicosia [[nik-oh-SEE-ah]].
Answer: Cyprus (or Kýpros

129. Using dark blue woad [[WODE]], the Picts created examples of this art form to commemorate acts of valor. Tā moko is a form of this art sacred to the (+) Māori, which gains its color from the soot of burned white pine mixed with kauri gum. Pope Adrian I banned this art form since he decreed that the body was made in the image of (*) God. For the point, name this art of body modification often using needles and ink.
Answer: Tattoos (

130. The victors of these wars developed a boarding device called a corvus, allowing them to use their superior legionaries in naval combat. Cato the Elder called for the third of these conflicts by repeatedly demanding that an enemy city must be destroyed. For the point, name this series of ancient wars for control of the Mediterranean between Rome and Carthage.
Answer: Punic Wars (

131. A racial slur for people originally from this country names a 1954 US operation that monitored these people, who were issued seasonal work passes in the Bracero Program. People from this country were the primary targets of violence during the Zoot Suit Riots in Los Angeles. For the point, identify these people who, after land reforms by Porfirio Diaz, began migrating north to the US.
Answer: Mexican Americans (

132. While this composer was exiled to Switzerland for his role in Dresden’s May Uprising, he wrote the essay Artwork of the Future, laying out his idea of the “total work of art,” or Gesamtkunstwerk. King Ludwig II allowed this composer of Tannhauser and Tristan und Isolde to construct a theater for his “music dramas” at Bayreuth [bye-­‐royt]. For the point, name this German opera composer who was inspired by Norse myth to write his Ring Cycle.
Answer: Richard Wagner ([ree-­‐kard vahg-­‐ner], but be lenient)

133. In one speech, this man repeated the phrase “last night” four times to highlight incidents in Guam and Hong Kong in that speech, which condemned an “unprovoked and dastardly attack” and called for Congress to declare war. For the point, name this President who gave the “Day of Infamy” speech on December 8th, 1941, the day after the Pearl Harbor attack.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (or FDR

134. This man responded to the murder of writer August von Kotzebue by banning student organizations with the Carlsbad Decree. This man was forced to resign after a speech by the Hungarian Lajos Kossuth as the revolutions of 1848 overthrew his conservative order. For the point, name this Austrian statesman who orchestrated the Concert of Europe at the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Klemens von Metternich

135. This body of water is home to a British naval base in the Chagos Archipelago that has been suspected of having a CIA prison on Diego Garcia. This body of water was the primary site of a disaster that killed several hundred thousand people along the shores of this ocean in December 2004. For the point, name this ocean that Portuguese explorer Vasco de Gama entered after rounding the Cape of Good Hope at the southern end of Africa.
Answer: Indian Ocean Page 1

136. A genre of still lifes featuring books produced in this region is called chaekgeori. This region was one of the leading producers of green-­‐glazed celadon during the Goryeo dynasty. A later king of this region’s Choson dynasty is credited with inventing its modern alphabet, hangul. For the point, name this peninsula, ruled in the 15th century by King Sejong.
Answer: Korean Peninsula (

137. For the point, name this loser of the Franco-­‐Prussian War, a Second Empire ruler of France and nephew of France’s first Emperor.
Answer: Napoleon III (

138. An alliance based on this peninsula included cities like Cora, Tusculum, and Alba Longa and signed the Treaty of Cassius with a nearby empire in 493 BC. The southern part of this peninsula was once known as Magna Graecia for its Greek colonies and was defended by Pyrrhus of Epirus. For the point, name this peninsula home to the Etruscans and other peoples conquered by the early Romans.
Answer: Italian peninsula (

139. This author wrote Concluding Unscientific Postscript, which classifies humanity into three stages of life beginning with childhood and ending with manhood. This philosopher traced man’s progress from hedonism to ethical life in Either/Or, which he wrote under one of his many pseudonyms. For the point, name this proto-­‐existentialist Danish philosopher who discussed the “knight of faith” in his Fear and Trembling.
Answer: Soren Kierkegaard (

140. This man established a base after landing on the ship Granma. This man led an unsuccessful attack on the government’s Moncada Barracks, but his later July 26 movement seized control of the country away from Fulgencio Batista in 1959. For the point, name this communist Cuban strongman who died in 2016.
Answer: Fidel Castro

141. Observation of these events caused the accelerated expansion of the Universe to be first noted when it was observed that these events were dimmer than expected. The brightest observed celestial event in history was one of these events that occurred in 1006 AD, while another of these events in 1054 AD was recorded by Chinese astronomers and led to the creation of the Crab nebula. For the point, name these events in which stars violently explode.
Answer: supernova (do not

142. The opening fighting of this war was the Battle of Edgehill, in which one side characteristically included cavalry commander Prince Rupert. The New Model Army was created during this war, whose opposing sides were nicknamed the Cavaliers and the Roundheads. For the point, name this war that culminated with the execution of Charles I on the orders of Oliver Cromwell.
Answer: English Civil War Page 2

143. Until its demise in the early 21st century, this country’s monarchy was the only one in the world in a majority Hindu country. This country is where Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary began their successful climb of the world’s highest mountain. For the point, name this Himalayan country where many climbers of Mount Everest have first set off from its capital of Kathmandu.
Answer: Nepal

144. Wang Mang attempted to usurp this dynasty by establishing the Xin [shin] line. The Record of the Grand Historian was compiled by Sima Qian [chee-­‐ahn] during this dynasty, whose other achievements include establishing the Silk Road. For the point, name this dynasty that shares its name with China’s majority ethnic group and succeeded the Qin [chin].
Answer: Han Dynasty

145. This region was the source of the Great Heathen Army, which conquered much of England before their defeat at Edington by Alfred the Great. Rulers born in region included Canute the Great and Harald Hardrada, and men from this region sacked Lindisfarne in 793 AD. For the point, name this region, the home of Viking invaders.
Answer: Scandinavia (

146. In this city, a Christian apostle first met the tent-­‐making couple Priscilla and Aquila. A letter addressed to the residents of this city states “Love suffers long and is kind; love does not envy” and contains a phrase translated as “through a glass, darkly.” For the point, name this city, the recipient of two Pauline epistles written while Paul was in Greece.
Answer: Corinth (

147. During this man’s regime, a place known as the “Hill of the Poisonous Trees,” or Tuol Sleng, was used as an execution center under Comrade Duch [dook]. This man’s regime replaced a general who deposed Norodom Sihanouk, Lon Nol. From Year Zero onward, this man attacked the “New People” who lived in urban areas and executed them in the “killing fields.” The Khmer Rouge was led by, for the point, what genocidal Cambodian dictator?
Answer: Pol Pot (

148. In 1912, oncologist Isaac Adler became the first physician to link this plant to one of its most infamous health results. This crop’s long history of being grown in Virginia began with John Rolfe. For the point, name this crop that was popularized in England by Sir Walter Raleigh and that can be found in cigarettes.
Answer: tobacco

149. This book ends abruptly after a character declares “if only there were no other people in the world.” The main character of this book shares a brief kiss with Peter van Daan and writes entries into a journal that she dubs “Kitty.” For the point, name this book that describes a Jewish girl’s experience hiding from the Nazis in Amsterdam.
Answer: The Diary of Anne Frank (

150. One ruler of this name recorded his empire’s history in the Behistun Inscription. Another king of this name was left to die by the Bactrian satrap Bessus and fled from the Battle of Gaugamela in his chariot; that last ruler of this name was dethroned by Alexander the Great. A “Great” ruler of this name launched a failed invasion of Greece in 490 BC. For the point, give this name shared by three Persian rulers, the first of whom lost at Marathon.
Answer: Darius (

151. Attempts to alleviate this event’s effects included the formation of an “exclusion zone” and the construction of an iron sarcophagus over the affected area. Backlash against the governmental coverup of this event led to the adoption of glasnost, or openness. For the point, name this 1986 meltdown of Reactor 4 at a facility in Pripyat, Ukraine, the world’s first Level 7 nuclear energy catastrophe.
Answer: Chernobyl disaster

152. Four years after this company was purchased for $4 billion by the Brazilian-­‐backed firm 3G Capital in the largest leveraged buyout in its industry’s history, this company “purchased” Tim Hortons in a tax inversion scheme that put its headquarters in Ontario. The predecessor of this company was prefixed with the word “Insta-­‐”, in honor of the Insta-­‐machines it was inspired to use by McDonald’s. The “imagery of something big” inspired the signature item of, for the point, what fast food chain that sells the Whopper?
Answer: Burger King (

153. A city in this US state became known as the “Cradle of Liberty” after the American Revolution. This state’s Commonwealth Health Insurance Connector is often considered to be one of the models for Obamacare and was supported by governor Mitt Romney. Charlie Baker currently leads, for the point, what state in New England where the governor does not have an official residence in Boston?
Answer: Massachu

154. A. A. Hoehling sued Universal Studios over plagiarizing his claim that this event was caused by sabotage. Herbert Morrison recorded live coverage of this event to be played alongside newsreel footage. In response to this event, the Graf Zeppelin II used helium to achieve its buoyancy instead of hydrogen. For the point, name this 1937 disaster in which thirty-­‐six people died when an airship burst into flame.
Answer: LZ 129 Hindenburg disaster (

155. In this city, the Nativity, Passion, and Glory Facades adorn a Gothic and Art Nouveau-­‐styled cathedral that was left unfinished by its architect, Antoni Gaudi. Legend has it that Hannibal himself founded this city, naming it after his own family. The Sagrada Familia is located in, for the point, what city that hosted the 1992 Summer Olympics and is the capital of Catalonia in Spain?
Answer: Barcelona Page 4

156. To help refugees, Fridtjof Nansen created a passport for this organization, which created the Mandate of Palestine. Japan left this organization after it invaded Manchuria in 1931, and Henry Cabot Lodge prevented the United States from joining this organization. Woodrow Wilson heavily promoted, for the point, what international organization to promote peace that was created after World War I?
Answer: League of Nations (or LN

157. The Supreme Court cases of Eichman v. U.S. and Texas v. Johnson dealt with the desecration of these objects, which is currently a protected form of free speech. Betsy Ross supposedly convinced George Washington that these objects should have five-­‐pointed, not six-­‐pointed stars. For the point, name this American symbol whose stripes represent the 13 colonies.
Answer: American flags (

158. This man was the presumptive heir to Franz Joseph, his uncle, who was the second-­‐to-­‐last Habsburg to rule in Europe. The Black Hand orchestrated this man’s death in Sarajevo. Gavrilo Princip assassinated, for the point, what archduke whose 1914 death led to an invasion of Serbia and the First World War?
Answer: Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria

159. After a group known as “Jennie May” planned this structure as part of a riverfront revitalization project, FDR authorized it in 1935 as the US’ first National Historic Site. Eero Saarinen designed this centerpiece of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial to honor Lewis and Clark. For the point, name this curved monument on the Mississippi River near St. Louis.
Answer: Gateway Arch (

160. This country’s Plain of Jars was significantly bombed during the 1960’s during a war fought primarily in its neighbor to the east. This country’s Hmong people have often been oppressed and its city of Luang Prabang has become a hub for tourists on a budget. For the point, name this country which, during the Vietnam War, was the primary site of the Ho Chi Minh trail through the mountains to the east of its capital, Vientiane.
Answer: Laos

161. Operation Iskra and the Sinyavino Offensive attempted to relieve this city, which was supplied by the Road of Life. The siege of this city was lifted by a corridor over neighboring Lake Ladoga, and was the target of Army Group North during Operation Barbarossa. For the point, name this city, a former capital of Russia that was besieged by Nazi Germany for over two years.
Answer: Leningrad (

162. This US president’s last Secretary of the Treasury, Levi Woodbury, called for land purchases to be made in gold and silver in the Specie Circular. This President’s refusal to renew the charter of the Second Bank of the United States led to the Bank War. For the point, name this president who passed a precarious economic situation to his successor, Martin van Buren.
Answer: Andrew Jackson

163. During this dynasty, rebellious governors launched the Revolt of the Three Feudatories, which was put down by the Green Standard Army. This dynasty’s founder, Nurhaci created the Eight Banners Army, and a century later, its Kangxi [kahng-­‐shee] Emperor welcomed Jesuit missionaries. For the point, name this Chinese dynasty founded by Manchu invaders after the fall of the Ming.
Answer: Qing [cheeng] Dynasty (

164. Miran Thompson and Sam Shockley were executed for instigating an uprising in this location. Frank Morris and the Anglin brothers drowned after attempting to leave this place by raft. Al Capone served out his sentence at, for the point, what prison, believed to have been escape proof, that was located on an island in San Francisco Bay?
Answer: Alcatraz (

165. One ruler of this empire led the successful conquest of another empire centered at Chan Chan known for its monochromatic pottery style, the Chimu. Manco Yupanqui [yu-­‐pahn-­‐kee] founded a breakaway state of this empire in Vilcabamba five years after a civil war in this empire ended in the defeat of a half-­‐ brother of Huascar, Atahualpa. The siege of Cuzco was fought by, for the point, what Peruvian empire that was conquered by the Spanish under Francisco Pizarro?
Answer: Incan Empire

166. A fort in this city had its walls torn down by Japanese troops to construct a runway for the nearby Kai Tak Airport. In this city, triads populated a once-­‐walled city built in the Kowloon peninsula. This city features the I. M. Pei designed Bank of China Building in its Central district. Reclamation projects have reduced the size of Victoria Harbor in, for the point, what special administrative region that was given to China from Britain in 1997?
Answer: Hong Kong Page 1

167. One example of this type of performance caused a riot at its premier in Paris in 1913, called The Rite of Spring. Tchaikovsky created a popular type of this work which features characters such as the Mouse King and Clara, and is often performed in December. For the point, name this type of artistic performance, of which Swan Lake and The Nutcracker are famous example.
Answer: ballet (

168. According to one of this man’s former hitmen, nicknamed Popeye, ex-­‐Minister Alberto Santofimio urged this man to order the assassination of presidential candidate Luis Galan. After escaping his private prison La Catedral, this man was hunted down by the Search Bloc and died in a 1993 shootout. For the point, name this Colombian drug lord, the leader of the Medellin [meh-­‐deh-­‐LEEN] Cartel.
Answer: Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria

169. Dredgers in this body of water invented the motorless skipjack boat to optimize their catch. This body of water was the site of Thomas Graves’ loss to the Admiral de Grasse, thwarting British attempts to resupply troops at Yorktown. A vital population of blue crabs lives in this bay, which is fed by the Susquehanna and Potomac Rivers. For the point, name this large bay that borders Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia.
Answer: Chesapeake Bay

170. A famine of this commodity in Lancashire, England, was caused by a decrease of its American exports. This commodity names the type of diplomacy used by the Confederacy to appeal to European powers during the Civil War, and it was nicknamed “King” due to its importance to the American south. For the point, name this textile crop that is processed by an Eli Whitney-­‐invented “gin.”
Answer: cotton

171. A fascist party in this country, the Iron Guard, was suppressed by Ion Antonescu, who was executed for war crimes after World War II. The last Communist ruler of this country was, with his wife Elena, executed on live TV on Christmas Day, 1989. For the point, name this country where dictator Nicolae Ceausescu ruled from Bucharest.
Answer: Romania

172. The problem of multiple generality in this field was tackled by Gottlob Frege [fray-­‐guh], who pioneered the “predicate” form of this discipline. Aristotle’s Organon was used by medieval theologians working in this field, which was combined with grammar and rhetoric in the standard trivium. For the point, name this branch of philosophy that studies reasoning.
Answer: logic

173. In one conflict in this region, the 93rd Highlanders became honored as the Thin Red Line. In this region, Lord Raglan made his name launching a courageous assault upon a Russian battery during the siege of Sevastopol. The Charge of the Light Brigade took place on, for the point, what Russian peninsula in the Black Sea, the subject of an 1850s war?
Answer: Crimean Peninsula (

174. This country holds the distinction of being the only one to unwillingly gain its independence; its first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, cried on television after this country was expelled from Malaysia. For the point, name this city-­‐state on the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

175. The losing side in this battle, whose center consisted of noble housecarls flanked by the fyrd militia, had defeated Harald Hardrada at the Battle of Stamford Bridge the previous month. Harold Godwinson died by taking an arrow to the eye in this battle, as depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry. For the point, name this 1066 battle that paved the way for William the Conqueror’s capture of England.
Answer: Battle of Hastings

176. A kingdom in this modern country moved its capital from Napata to Meroe [mare-­‐oh-­‐ee] in the 6th century BC; Piye and Kashta were rulers of that ancient Kingdom of Kush. This country is home to the southern reaches of the ancient region of Nubia. Sulaymon Solong founded the Sultanate of Darfur in what is now, for the point, what African country whose southern territory became independent in 2011?
Answer: Sudan (

177. Charles the Affable died after bumping his head on the lintel above the entrance to a venue where this activity took place. The father of King George III was either killed with a cricket ball or a ball used for this sport. In 1789, members of the National Assembly took an oath in a venue for this sport. Jeu de paume was a racquet-­‐less precursor to, for the point, what sport played professionally by Roger Federer and Serena Williams?
Answer: tennis (

178. This document ends with a mutual “pledge to each other” of “our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor” after having condemned a ruler for “imposing Taxes on us without our Consent,” one of numerous “repeated injuries and usurpations” committed by the King. John Hancock affixed an oversized signature to, for the point, what founding American document that was approved on July 4, 1776?
Answer: US Declaration of Independence

179. This material names a type of cross that was the focus of a speech in 1896 by the populist American politician William Jennings Bryan. This material sparked a mass migration to the Klondike region of Canada when it was discovered there, which led to many miners freezing to death. For the point, name this precious metal which forms a prize given to winning athletes at the Olympics.
Answer: Gold

180. An archaeologist from this country discovered the Mask of Agamemnon in his search for a historical Troy. A government in this country created the Entarte Kunst exhibition to “show off” the works of Die Brucke artist Ernst Kirchner. For the point, name this country, home to Heinrich Schliemann, where degenerate art was banned by the Nazi party.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland

181. This modern country’s former Northwest Frontier province was bounded by the Durand Line, and it includes a large Pashtun population in Waziristan. Shortly after Muhammad Ali Jinnah became governor general of this nation, conflict broke out with its majority Hindu neighbor. The Jammu and Kashmir state is disputed by China, India, and, for the point, what nation governed from Islamabad?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan Page 3

182. Under this British monarch, the prime minister Lord Bute ruled for a year and expelled the publisher John Wilkes for libel. This king, who authorized taxes on British colonies to pay for the Seven Years’ War, suffered in his later years from dementia and insanity. For the point, name this British king who ruled during the American Revolution, the third of his name.
Answer: George III (

183. Absolute Chakri rule ended with this country’s 1932 constitution, and its King Bhumibol ruled from 1946 to his 2016 death. This country’s military leader, Prayuth Chan-­‐ocha, has applied lese-­‐ majeste [lez ma-­‐ja-­‐stay] laws to block criticism of this country’s new king, Rama X [tenth]. For the point, name this country where protests supporting the Shinawatra family have taken place in Bangkok.
Answer: Thailand

184. Negotiations in this location defined the modern borders of Hungary, agreed to in the Treaty of Trianon. The third building campaign in this location occurred after the Dutch War and included the creation of the Hall of Mirrors. For the point, name this palace where Louis XIV [14] of France established his court and where the primary treaty ending World War I was signed.
Answer: Versailles (

185. Approximations for this number named “Milu” were discovered by the 5th century Chinese astronomer Zu Chongzhi; one of which was 355 over 113. Archimedes used a polynomial algorithm to obtain lower and upper bounds for the value of this constant. For the point, name this constant, equal to the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter, which is roughly equal to 3.14.
Answer: pi

186. In one expedition, this man defeated Desiderius and conquered the Lombard kingdom, though he was less successful when Basque troops destroyed his rearguard in Roncevaux Pass in the Pyrenees. This son of Pepin the Short was coronated on Christmas Day by Pope Leo III. For the point, name this Frankish king who was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 800.
Answer: Charlemagne (or Charles the Great

187. Richard Allen converted a blacksmith shop into one of these buildings in the 1790s in Philadelphia. Jonathan Edwards worked at one of these buildings in Northampton. Two lanterns were hung in one of these buildings in Boston as part of Paul Revere’s Ride. Boston’s Old North and Trinity are, for the point, what type of building for Christian congregations?
Answer: churches

188. In this country, in 1863, protests against Russian conscription led to the January Uprising. After an 1846 uprising, Austria and Russia agreed to violate the Congress of Vienna by revoking the “free city” status that had been granted to this country’s city of Krakow. In the 18th century, European powers thrice partitioned, for the point, what country, the former site of the Duchy of Warsaw?
Answer: Poland

189. This man, who was Edward Braddock’s chief aide during the French and Indian War, attacked a group of unprepared Hessian soldiers on the day after Christmas. Christopher Jackson won a Tony for portraying this man in Hamilton, in which he is introduced in the song “Right Hand Man.” For the point, name this commander of the Continental Army who won the Battle of Trenton after crossing the Delaware River in 1776.
Answer: George Washington Page 4

190. Shortly before his death, this man acted as a guide and navigator for an expedition to Nantucket Sound aboard the Swan. This man harvested fish from the muddy banks of the Eel River and explained methods of fertilizing corn and beans according to an account by William Bradford. For the point, name this Patuxet Native American who lived among the Plymouth colonists and whose agricultural prowess provided food for the first Thanksgiving.
Answer: Squanto (or Tisquantum) Page 5

191. Backlash against the Treaty of Tientsin helped prompt this conflict, in which a 55-­‐day siege of the International Legations was ended by the arrival of the Eight Nation Alliance. The Empress Dowager Cixi [see-­‐shee] supported a militia group against foreign missionaries in, for the point, what Chinese rebellion led by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists?
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (

192. This river is said to be home to serpents known as “phayas,” which locals believe are responsible for the Naga fireballs that seem to rise out of this river’s water. When this river floods, low tides and flow reversals prompt it to flow into the Tonle [ton-­‐lay] Sap. For the point, name this river that drains into the South China Sea after forming most of Laos’ western border, the longest river in Southeast Asia.
Answer: Mekong River

193. The hero Trophonius named one of these places, another of which was built around an oak tree in Dodona. Gases and vapors from hot springs were used during a ritual at one of these places in which Pythia, a priestess of Apollo, would utter cryptic statements believed to predict the future. For the point, name these Greek religious sites such as Delphi.
Answer: oracles (

194. This politician reversed a previous stance on the legalization of same-­‐sex marriage, partially in support of his openly lesbian daughter, Mary. In the 1990s, this man served as the CEO of Halliburton and as Secretary of Defense under George H.W. Bush. For the point, name this Wyoming politician who served as George W. Bush’s vice president.
Answer: Richard “Dick” Cheney

195. This man offered “Comfort, not condolence” to the parents of fallen soldiers, as recorded by Thucydides in a funeral oration after the first year of the Peloponnesian War. This man orchestrated the growth of the Delian League as his city’s empire, moving its treasury to the Parthenon. For the point, name this statesman of the Golden Age of Athens.
Answer: Pericles

196. Muckraker Ida Tarbell wrote a lengthy history of one company in this industry, which had been founded by John Rockefeller. This industry grew quickly in the North Sea in the 1970’s a decade during which supply shocks in this industry led to economic disruptions in countries dependent on Middle Eastern sources of this commodity. For the point, name this commodity whose sources are exploited alongside natural gas deposits in the Gulf nations, such as the UAE and Saudi Arabia.
Answer: Oil or Petroleum

197. This stadium’s design moved away from a retractable roof design after a roof collapsed at France’s De Gaulle airport in 2004. This stadium will be the largest venue in use for the 2022 Winter Olympics, though Herzog, Meuron and Ai Weiwei originally designed it for use in the 2008 Summer Olympics. For the point, name this Beijing stadium that resembles a fowl’s resting place.
Answer: Bird’s Nest (

198. This party lost 40 seats in a 1924 election shortly after the publication of the Zinoviev letter, which embarrassed Ramsay MacDonald. This party implemented the National Health Service and other welfare programs under the leadership of Clement Attlee, who defeated Winston Churchill in the 1945 election. For the point, name this left-­‐leaning political party in the United Kingdom.
Answer: Labour Party

199. Colonists from this country fought Lenape natives in Kieft’s War. A colonist from this country was nicknamed “Peg Leg Pete,” and according to a popular legend, another colonist from this country purchased Manhattan for the equivalent of 24 dollars. Peter Minuit and Peter Stuyvesant represented, for the point, what country that controlled New York before the British?
Answer: Netherlands (

200. This woman’s Casket Letters implicated her in the explosion that killed her husband, Lord Darnley. This woman was executed after the discovery of the Babington Plot, which aimed to install her as the Catholic ruler of England. For the point, name this cousin and rival of Elizabeth I, the mother of James VI of Scotland.
Answer: Mary Stuart (or Mary, Queen of Scots

201. This composer of the Hunting Cantata included two viola da gambas but no violins in the sixth and final work in a collection named for a German state. This composer’s Musical Offering was based on a melody given to him by Frederick the Great. Felix Mendelssohn revived the music of, for the point, what Baroque composer of the Brandenburg Concertos?
Answer: Johann Sebastian Bach

202. Major theatres in this 20th century war included the Liaodong Peninsula, the Yellow Sea, and Mukden. Theodore Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating an end to this war in the Treaty of Portsmouth. The Baltic fleet was crushed at the Battle of Tsushima in, for the point, what war fought between a European and an Asian power in the early 20th century?
Answer: Russo-­‐Japanese War

203. A 2008 speech given by a holder of this position gave a speech honoring “the oldest continuing cultures in human history,” calling his country to “reflect on their past mistreatment.” That speech about the Stolen Generations was given by a holder of this position named Kevin Rudd. The only woman to ever hold this position was Julia Gillard of the Labor Party. For the point, name this political post currently held by Malcolm Turnbull, who leads the government in Canberra.
Answer: Prime Minister of Australia (

204. This novel exposed the plight of “ragged school” children to wealthy Victorians by praising the generosity of Mr Fezziwig and exposing the regrets of Jacob Marley. This novel’s protagonist meets ghosts representing the present, past, and future, who inspire him to help Bob Cratchit and Tiny Tim. For the point, name this novel by Charles Dickens in which Ebenezer Scrooge discovers the true meaning of Christmas.
Answer: A Christmas Carol Page 2

205. The poet Callimachus catalogued books in this city at a facility where Ptolemy II called for a minimum of 500,000 scrolls to be held in storage. One of the Seven Wonders of the World was located on the small island of Pharos near this city. Euclid studied in, for the point, what Egyptian city, the home of a famous Lighthouse and a library that suffered several devastating fires?
Answer: Alexandria

206. This event began when Betty Parris and Abigail Williams claimed to have felt pinpricks and violent seizures. Twenty people were executed in 1692 and 1693 during, for the point, what event in which accusations of supernatural happenings caused a panic in colonial Connecticut and Massachusetts?
Answer: Salem witch trials (

207. Two of these objects are used to represent the muses Thalia and Melpomene [mel-­‐pom-­‐eh-­‐nee]. The heads of 2 nude women are thought to be representations of these objects from Africa in Picasso’s painting, Les Desmoiselles d’Avignon. For the point, name these objects used in ritual dance traditions in Africa and to cover the faces of ancient Greek actors.
Answer: masks

208. After Abbas III was deposed, the Afsharid Dynasty was founded in this country by Nader Shah. This country’s capital was moved to Isfahan by Abbas the Great, the fifth Shah of a dynasty that installed Twelver Shia Islam as this country’s official religion. The Safavid Dynasty ruled, for the point, what Middle Eastern country that moved its capital in 1796 to Tehran?
Answer: Iran (

209. From 1935 to 1949, this phenomenon occurred in China because English printing presses outpaced those of Chiang Kai-­‐Shek’s government. Eviction of white farmers by Robert Mugabe’s government contributed to a major instance of this phenomenon in 1990s Zimbabwe that resulted in the creation of 100-­‐billion-­‐dollar bank notes. For the point, name this phenomenon in which currency is devalued and prices rise.
Answer: (hyper)inflation

210. The casualties in one battle of this war led James Spears to compare its machine gun fire to a hamburger machine. Hill 937 thus became known as Hamburger Hill in this war, during which Company C was commanded by William Calley during the My Lai Massacre. For the point, name this Southeast Asian war from which US forces withdrew shortly before the fall of Saigon.
Answer: Vietnam War

211. A route used in this industry was established by Jesse Chisholm. Railroad facilities were built for use in this industry in Abilene and Kansas City, which shipped cargo to stockyards in Chicago. The development of barbed wire ended the era of massive drives in, for the point, what industry consisting of western ranches?
Answer: cattle industry (

212. In 1949, Claude Shannon published the first paper describing how a computer could be taught to perform this activity. Leonhard Euler worked on, but did not solve, a problem concerning finding a Hamiltonian path for the “tour” of one of the pieces used in this game. IBM’s computer Deep Blue won a 1996 match of this game against Garry Kasparov, a Grand Master. For the point, name this strategy game played with knights, pawns, and kings.
Answer: playing chess

213. This island was the site of the first Winter Olympic Games held in Asia, which took place in 1972. Together with the neighboring Kurile Islands, this island forms the ancestral homeland of the Ainu people, whose language has been largely displaced by Japanese speakers. For the point, name this island, where fishing and skiing form major industries in and near Sapporo, the northernmost of the four main islands of Japan.
Answer: Hokkaido

214. After Pyrrhus deployed this weapon against the Roman cavalry, they were forced to retreat at the Battle of Heraclea. Persian masters of these weapons were called mahouts, and they were used at the Battle of Gaugamela by Darius III, who deployed them as cavalry against Alexander the Great. Hannibal famously crossed the Alps with, for the point, what tusked war animal?
Answer: war elephants

215. This country conducted a series of attacks on its neighbor Poland-­‐Lithuania in a campaign called the Deluge. This country captured parts of Pomerania and broke the power of the Hanseatic League. Its most famous ruler intervened in the Thirty Years’ War on the Protestant side until his death at the Battle of Lutzen. For the point, name this home of Gustavus Adolphus, who ruled from Stockholm.
Answer: Sweden

216. This company controlled the Straits Settlements and was formally dissolved by its namesake Stock Dividend Redemption Act. Robert Clive led this company’s forces to victory at the Battle of Plassey. This company lost control of its namesake country after the Sepoy Mutiny with the creation of the Raj. For the point, name this British company that controlled the trade of many spices throughout East Asia.
Answer: British East India Company (”British” not needed after mentioned)

217. A hero acquired one of these objects from an eight-­‐headed beast whose heads were lured into eight gates baited with eight jars of wine. A mirror, a jewel, and one of these objects named Kusanagi are the three sacred treasures of Japan. For the point, name these objects, such as the katana, that were used by samurai warriors in combat.
Answer: swords (

218. These figures were jointly granted a title by Pope Alexander VI, who also granted them land with the bull Inter caetera. The conquest of Granada was completed during the reigns of these two monarchs, who expelled their country’s Jews with the Alhambra Decree. For the point, name these two Catholic Monarchs of Spain who authorized Christopher Columbus to sail to the New World.
Answer: Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile (

219. Dissent against this government was suppressed by the Milice under the control of Pierre Laval. This government attempted to gain legitimacy by appointing the hero of the battle of Verdun as its figurehead. Philippe Petain headed, for the point, what French government that collaborated with the Nazis?
Answer: Vichy France (

220. This country’s history contains a period of history at the end of the Rurik Dynasty, where men known as False Dmitris were prominent figures in the so-­‐called Time of Troubles. Boris Godunov was another early ruler of this country, along with Michael Romanov, whose founded a dynasty in this country that lasted until 1917. For the point, name this country where tsars ruled throughout the 19th century.
Answer: Russia

221. In this US state, George Pickett’s decision to attend a fish bake led to the fall of the Five Forks railway junction. This state’s Henrico County was the site of a diversionary attack at Deep Bottom, as Ambrose Burnside attempted to detonate a mine behind enemy forces and initiate the Battle of the Crater. In this state, the capture of Petersburg was vital in forcing the surrender of the Confederacy. For the point, name this US state where the Confederate capital of Richmond was located.
Answer: Virginia Page 5

222. In this city, the communist Marinus van der Lubbe was convicted of arson in 1933. This city’s Gauleiter for two decades was Joseph Goebbels, and a famous photo taken by Yevgeny Khaldei shows a soldier raising a Soviet flag over this city’s Reichstag. The Fuhrerbunker was constructed in, for ten points, what capital city of Nazi Germany?
Answer: Berlin

223. Traveling performers who made use of these objects in the 1920s became known as barnstormers. A wooden one of these objects nicknamed the Spruce Goose was designed by Howard Hughes. Two siblings worked in a bicycle shop to build one of these objects that they operated in Kitty Hawk in 1903. For ten points, name these vehicles that were first piloted by the Wright Brothers.
Answer: airplanes (

224. A leader of this country allegedly drew upon a shadow cabal of advisers known as the “Eight Heavenly Fairies.” An investigation in this country revealed that many presidential speeches had been altered ahead of time by the shaman Choi Soon-­‐Sil. For ten points, name this country whose president Park Geun-­‐Hye was impeached in 2017 in the midst of mass protests in Seoul.
Answer: South Korea (or the Republic of Korea; do not

225. Anton Weidinger played a keyed version of this instrument, and Jeremiah Clarke’s Prince of Denmark’s March is known as its “Voluntary.” This instrument has a cylindrical bore, unlike the cornet, and is twice as long as a related instrument used to play “Taps,” the bugle. For ten points, name this highest-­‐pitched brass instrument in a standard orchestra.
Answer: trumpet

226. Alexander Hamilton convinced several delegates from this city to support his Assumption Bill by supporting the Residence Act, which provided for the purchase of lands near this city. Pierre L’Enfant designed a plan that established the layout of this city, which was burned by British forces during the War of 1812. For ten points, name this city where Dolley Madison saved paintings that were hung in the White House.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

227. In this scientist’s Mysterium Cosmographicum, he proposed that the six known planets are organized in a system defined by Platonic solids. This assistant to Tycho Brahe [ty-­‐ko bra-­‐hee] noted that Mars sweeps out equal areas in equal times and travels in an elliptical orbit. For ten points, name this German astronomer who discovered the three laws of planetary motion.
Answer: Johannes Kepler Page 1

228. A leader of this empire won the Battle of Kleidion and married his sister Anna to Vladimir the Great of Kiev. Tribonian composed a law code of this empire named for a leader who faced the Nika Riots. Basil II the Bulgar Slayer ruled this empire, which was founded by Constantine I. For ten points, name this empire, ruled by Justinian the Great from Constantinople, that fell in 1453.
Answer: Byzantine Empire (

229. After this man’s mentor was assassinated, this man gave an impromptu speech in which he said “the light has gone out of our lives.” On the eve of his nation’s independence, this leader described his people’s “tryst with destiny.” For ten points, name this protege of Mahatma Gandhi, the first and longest-­‐serving Prime Minister of India.
Answer: Jawaharlal Nehru

230. Ingres [ahng] showed this man with symbols of Charlemagne and Caesar on his Imperial Throne, while a painting by Orchardson shows this man on the ship Bellerophon heading to his exile. Delaroche painted a realistic version of a scene where this man rides a donkey rather than a rearing horse across the Alps. For ten points, name this emperor of France.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

231. To defend against this country, the Sultanate of Oman built the Old Fort in Zanzibar. After the collapse of its Estado Novo, this country relinquished its colonies in Angola and Mozambique. For ten points, name this country whose caravel ships explored the world under Vasco de Gama and Henry the Navigator.
Answer: Portugal 

232. A dispute over the deaths of federal troops during the “Spot Resolutions” was prompted by the United States’ use of this river, not the Nueces, as a southern boundary. That territorial dispute prompted President James Polk to begin the Mexican-­‐American War. For ten points, name this river that forms the south Texan border.
Answer: Rio Grande (or Rio Bravo del Norte) BONUS: Far from what is now the US-­‐Mexico border, Texas attempted to expand east of the Rio Grande to capture what lucrative trail that connected Independence, Missouri with the capital city of New Mexico? Santa Fe Trail

233. This man’s followers swore the Pledge of the Tree while one of his ambassadors was being held hostage. This commander’s troops fended off a far larger besieging army in the Battle of the Trench. This man defeated a contingent representing the Quraysh merchants at the Battle of Badr, after which he consolidated his base of power in Medina. Mecca was conquered by, for ten points, what leader who performed the Hijra migration and founded Islam?
Answer: Muhammad BONUS: This man, who served as a guard during the Battle of the Trench and the Battle of Badr, is nicknamed “The Truthful” and became the first Caliph after Muhammad’s death. Abu Bakr as-­‐Siddiq

234. These shapes were defined by Apollonius as the set of points in the plane that have a fixed ratio of distances to two foci. When Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that a certain constant is transcendental, he proved it is impossible to “square” one of these shapes. Line segments between two points on them are called chords. For ten points, name these shapes that have a constant radius.
Answer: circles BONUS: Blaise Pascal, a French mathematician, is famous for his namesake type of which other shape, which shows the distribution of binomial coefficients?. Triangle

235. During this man’s 1643-­‐44 voyage to find a passage to Chile south of the normal trade route, he mistook the west coast of New Zealand’s North Island as the west coast of Australia, thought the Cook Strait was a bay, and missed mainland Australia entirely. For ten points, name this Dutch explorer and namesake of an Australian island state.
Answer: Abel Tasman 

236. This city hosted the only Olympic performance of Eddie “The Eagle” Edwards, a British ski jumper whose performance was bad enough that the Olympics instituted stricter qualification rules. The first Olympic performance of the Jamaican bobsled team came in this city, whose Olympic Saddledome and Stampede Corral were used as venues for its 1988 Winter Olympics. For ten points, name this Canadian city whose NHL team, the Flames, competes with the Edmonton Oilers for bragging rights in Alberta.
Answer: Calgary BONUS: Canada failed to win an official gold medal in the Calgary Olympics, but did win a gold medal in this demonstration sport, which involves 40-­‐pound stones. This sport is famous for its competitors using brooms to furiously sweep the ice. Men’s and/or Women’s curling

237. During the Franco-­‐Prussian War, this general led the Army of the Vosges. After a handshake at Teano, this leader declared his loyalty to King Victor Emanuel II. This ex-­‐member of the Carbonari led his redshirts on the Expedition of the Thousand to conquer the Kingdom of Two Sicilies. For ten points, name this general who led the military campaigns that unified Italy.
Answer: Giuseppe Garibaldi 
238. During this war, French tanks and aircraft helped the inexperienced American Expeditionary Force take the town of Cantigny. During this war, which coincided with the Dada movement, John Singer Sargent painted blindfolded soldiers returning after being mustard gassed at the Battle of Ypres [eep]. The author of “Dulce et decorum est,” Wilfred Owen, died in, for ten points, what war that lasted from 1914 to 1918?
Answer: World War I (

239. An important primary account of this empire’s mythology was compiled by Bernardino de Sahagun and is named the Florentine Codex. According to a myth from this empire, a hummingbird deity guided their ancestors to an island in Lake Texcoco [tesh-­‐ko-­‐ko]. For ten points, what empire’s creation myth included Huitzilopochtli [h’weetz-­‐ee-­‐lo-­‐POK-­‐tlee] helping to found the city of Tenochtitlan [ten-­‐oak-­‐ teet-­‐lahn]?
Answer: Aztec Empire BONUS: This Aztec deity, who possesses a name meaning “feathered serpent,” retrieves the bones of mankind from the underworld and dips them in his own blood to restore the human race to life. According to popular legend, some Aztecs believed Hernan Cortez to be an incarnation of this god. Quetzalcoatl Third Quarter The categories are ...

240. Vice President under Eisenhower during both of his terms.
Answer: Richard Milhous Nixon

241. First Soviet satellite that launched the Space Race and led Eisenhower to create NASA.
Answer: Sputnik I

242. Complex whose “unwarranted influence” Eisenhower warned against in his farewell address.
Answer: military-­‐industrial complex (

243. Amendment that limited Eisenhower to two terms, ratified under his predecessor.
Answer: 22nd Amendment to the US Constitution

244. Surname of CIA director Allen and Secretary of State John Foster, who each served under Eisenhower.
Answer: Dulles

245. Senate Majority Leader with whom Eisenhower’s administration negotiated, infamous for his namesake “treatment.”
Answer: Lyndon Baines Johnson (

246. Town that Eisenhower retired to near the site of an 1863 battle.
Answer: Gettysburg Page 6

247. Country ruled by the Plantagenets during the war.
Answer: England (do not

248. The Plantagenets were opposed by the House of Valois from what country?
Answer: France

249. French peasant girl who helped relieve Orleans and was later burned at the stake.
Answer: Joan of Arc (or Jeanne d’Arc

250. Three kings of England during the war shared what name?
Answer: Henry

251. Epidemic disease that struck Europe, weakening France before the Battle of Poitiers [pwa-­‐tee-­‐ay].
Answer: Black Death (

252. 1346 battle, fought ten years before Poitiers, where English longbowmen first saw success.
Answer: Battle of Crecy

253. City on the English Channel that was taken by the English after that battle.
Answer: Calais [cah-­‐lay]

254. Number of years the war actually lasted, within 5.
Answer: 116 (

255. Ancient English ring monument whose components each weigh more than 20 tons.
Answer: Stonehenge

256. Type of engineering project mastered by the Romans to deliver water to its cities, such as Segovia.
Answer: aqueducts

257. Copper statue standing on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, built by Gustave Eiffel.
Answer: Statue of Liberty (

258. Babylonian king who ordered the building of the Hanging Gardens for his wife.
Answer: Nebuchadnezzar II (or Nebuchadrezzar II)

259. Type of Mesopotamian step-­‐pyramid, a Great one of which was built in Ur.
Answer: ziggurats

260. Former church and mosque in Istanbul, designed by Isidore of Miletus, once the world’s largest cathedral.
Answer: Hagia Sophia

261. Massive hydroelectric dam on the Yangtze River that once held the world record for most power generated.
Answer: Three Gorges Dam

262. Major European river the Romans built a bridge across to invade Dacia in modern Romania
Answer: Danube Page 8

263. The winning side of this war controversially suffered non-­‐battle casualties when Nelson Miles’ soldiers ate spoiled “embalmed beef.” The telegraphed instruction (+) “furnish the pictures and I’ll furnish the war” allegedly helped prompt this conflict, as the yellow journalism of William Randolph Hearst raised tensions after the sinking of the (*) USS Maine. Puerto Rico and Guam were ceded to the United States following, for ten points, what 1898 war against a European power that had controlled Cuba?
Answer: Spanish-­‐American War

264. One subordinate of this man faced a major setback after being defeated by Publicola near Mount Garganus; that man, Crixus was killed along with another of this man’s allies, (+) Oenomaus. This man was finally defeated at the Battle of Siler River, and after his death, many of his (*) followers were crucified along the Appian Way. For ten points, name this former gladiator who led a slave revolt against the Roman Republic.
Answer: Spartacus

265. This man allied France to Sweden via the Treaty of Barwalde in the Thirty Years’ War, countering (+) Hapsburg power. This man, who defeated the Duke of Buckingham in the 1627 siege of La Rochelle, was targeted by (*) Marie de Medici in the Day of the Dupes. For ten points, name this “Red Eminence,” an anti-­‐Huguenot clergyman and chief minister to King Louis XIII [13th] who was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu (or Armand Jean du Plessis)

266. One Prime Minister of this country agreed to Roy McMurtry, Roy Romanow, and Jean Chretien’s so-­‐called “Kitchen Accord.” (+) Other leaders of this country have included Brian Mulroney and Kim Campbell, while (*) Alberta is a relatively politically conservative part of this country. For ten points, name this country led by a two-­‐time Liberal Prime Minister named Pierre Trudeau, who was the father of its current leader, Justin Trudeau.
Answer: Canada

267. Architects combined Baroque and Gothic styles to create this city’s “Seven Sister” skyscrapers under the direction of Boris Iofan, who also designed a neoclassical palace that would have been built over the demolished Cathedral of Christ the (+) Saviour. An architect working in this city was blinded so he could never design anything as beautiful as his work on St. (*) Basil’s Cathedral. In the 20th century, tanks commemorated the October Revolution with parades in Red Square in, for ten points, what capital of Russia?
Answer: Moscow Page 9

268. This man was treated for a broken leg by Samuel Mudd before dying in a shootout with federal troops on a farm in northern Virginia. This man’s reputation as an (+) actor allowed him to sneak into a theatrical performance where he jumped onto the stage and shouted “Sic Semper Tyrannis” at the audience in (*) Ford’s Theater after shooting a U.S. president. For ten points, name this assassin of Abraham Lincoln.
Answer: John Wilkes Booth

269. The status of one ethnic group in this country is protected by Article 153 of its constitution. This country’s capital was the site of the 13th of May race riots in 1969. Chin Peng led a communist insurgency during this country’s namesake (+) Emergency. Najib Razak is the Prime Minister of this country, where the Yang di-­‐Pertuan Agong is an elected (*) monarch who serves as head of state. For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country where the Petronas Towers stand in Kuala Lumpur.
Answer: Malaysia

270. During this event, Helene is killed by a rapist who bites her, though the rapist himself is killed by the apprentice of the wood carver Master Niklaus. This historical event provides the backdrop of Hermann Hesse’s novel (+) Narcissus and Goldmund. Seven women and three men share a hundred stories with each other while fleeing this event in (*) Florence in Giovanni Boccaccio’s Decameron. Early treatments of the Danse Macabre motif depict the ravages of, for ten points, what Medieval epidemic?
Answer: Black Death (

271. This agreement’s namesake peace process ended after a visit by Ariel Sharon to the Temple Mount caused the Second Intifada. Yitzhak Rabin and (+) Yasser Arafat were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize a year after signing the first part of this agreement, which began with mutual recognition between the (*) PLO and the government of Israel. For ten points, name this 1990s-­‐era peace agreement that began with secret negotiations in the Norwegian capital, for which it is named.
Answer: Oslo Accords BONUS: The

272. After the Battle of the Allia, one of these structures was built and named for Servius Tullius. That structure was surpassed by the Aurelian line, built in the 3rd century AD. For ten points, name this type of defensive structure that was built by the Qin Dynasty to guard the northern border of China.
Answer: walls (

273. A Walter Isaacson biography of this man inspired a 2015 film in which Seth Rogen plays a colleague of this man, Steve Wozniak. After this man was kicked off the Lisa project, he led the Macintosh project until resigning from the company he co-­‐founded in 1976. For ten points, name this business icon and longtime CEO of Apple.
Answer: Steve Jobs

274. In 1976, George H.W. Bush took over a leadership role in this organization for slightly less than a year. This agency trained a group of exiles called Brigade 2506, which was decisively defeated after an amphibious landing at the Bay of Pigs. For ten points, name this American organization, based in Langley, Virginia, that manages international espionage.
Answer: Central Intelligence Agency (or CIA)

275. A palace partially named for this color was the residence of British monarchs for most of the 16th and 17th centuries. The Ditchley Portrait shows Queen Elizabeth wearing an outfit of this color. A rose of this color was used to symbolize the House of York, as opposed to the red rose used by the House of Lancaster. For ten points, name this color of the chalk-­‐laden Cliffs of Dover.
Answer: white (

276. This man’s Foreign Minister, Francois Guizot, fought with Lord Palmerston over the Spanish Queen Isabella II during the Affair of the Spanish Marriages. This King was frequently drawn as a pear by Honore Daumier [on-­‐or-­‐ay doh-­‐me-­‐ay]. This man came to power during the July Revolution and was overthrown in 1848. For ten points, name this French citizen king.
Answer: Louis-­‐Philippe I (

277. In a story set in this city, Gretta relates how her one-­‐time lover Michael Furey perished in a snowstorm after singing for her, causing Gretta’s husband Gabriel Conroy to contemplate the nature of mortality. Charles Parnell is commemorated in “Ivy Day in the Committee Room,” which is set in, for ten points, what city that titles a collection of short stories, including “The Dead,” written by James Joyce?
Answer: Dublin (

278. The dropping of the voiceless glottal fricative type of these constructs in the English language took place during the 13th century. The place and manner of articulation are typically both given when categorizing these constructs, which differ from a similar construct in that they require a complete or partial closure of the vocal tract. For ten points, name these linguistic constructs that are often contrasted with vowels.
Answer: consonants

279. Description acceptable. The first person known to propose this theory was Aristarchus of Samos. This theory, which argued in opposition to the Ptolemaic [toh-­‐le-­‐may-­‐ik] model, was promoted in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, a book that led to Galileo’s house arrest. For ten points, name this astronomical theory proposed by Copernicus as a replacement for geocentrism.
Answer: heliocentrism (

280. William Lloyd Garrison burned a copy of the US Constitution because it failed to support this cause, which he advocated for in The Liberator. William Wilberforce fought for this cause in the UK, and it was made law throughout the British Empire in 1833. For ten points, name this cause that was achieved via the 13th Amendment and the Emancipation Proclamation.
Answer: abolition of slavery (

281. The Jewel Voice Broadcast was delivered by the holder of this position. Between the 9th and 12th centuries, holders of this position frequently married women of the Fujiwara clan. In 1946, the holder of this position renounced his divine descent from the sun goddess Amaterasu. For ten points, name this position held by Hirohito during World War II.
Answer: Emperor of Japan (

282. Natives who worked near this location were put on the silver roll as opposed to the gold roll, which was reserved for Americans and Europeans. The Torrijos-­‐Carter Treaties specified a twenty year time frame for this location to pass from American control to that of a Central American country. For ten points, name this waterway, opened in 1914, that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal (

283. A leader of this period was stunted at the Battle of Red Cliffs, which precipitated the rise of two rivals. Sima Yan established the Jin dynasty during this period by overthrowing the Cao Cao-­‐founded Wei. The collapse of the Han dynasty led to, for ten points, what strife-­‐filled period of Chinese history, named for the number of major combatants?
Answer: Three Kingdoms period BONUS: The tumult of the Three Kingdoms period essentially started in 184 AD with this peasant revolt, led by Zhang Jiao. Yellow Turban Rebellion (

284. This man, who removed Andrei Gromyko as foreign minister, began a policy of nonintervention known as the Sinatra Doctrine. The Gang of Eight targeted this man in a coup that was thwarted by a speech given atop a tank by Boris Yeltsin. The reforming policy of glasnost was championed by, for ten points, what final leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev BONUS: The aforementioned Sinatra Doctrine applied to the USSR’s allies within this defensive pact, a rival to NATO during the Cold War. Warsaw Pact (

285. The need to extract this metal led Bartholeme de Medina to design the patio process, which uses mercury for that purpose, much like the Washoe process. The Bolivian mines at Potosi produced this commodity, which were minted as Spanish pieces of eight. Bimetallism in the United States called for the use of, for the point, what metal that is less precious than gold?
Answer: Silver BONUS: A negative connotation is attached to silver for some as a result of the Biblical tale of whose betrayal of Jesus for “thirty pieces of silver”? Judas Iscariot

286. An early example of these structures consisted of six mastabas stacked upon each other; that building was built by Djoser and designed by the architect Imhotep. Examples of these structures commissioned by Menkaure, Khafre, and Khufu are found near the Sphinx. For ten points, identify these ancient Egyptian tombs.
Answer: Egyptian pyramids BONUS: The Great Pyramids and the Sphinx are found on the outskirts of modern Cairo in this city. Giza

287. This military force was dismantled at Scapa Flow on Ludwig von Reuter’s orders, hoping that it would not be divided up between the victors after the Armistice. Alfred von Tirpitz revolutionized, for ten points, what military force that included the High Seas Fleet and which brought the US into World War I by sinking the Lusitania?
Answer: Imperial German Navy (

288. After this war’s Battle of Denain, one side recovered much of its losses under the command of the duc de Villars. The duc de Tallard’s attempt to capture Vienna during this war was defeated at the Battle of Blenheim [blen-­‐em]. The Duke of Marlborough and Eugene of Savoy commanded the winning alliance in this war against Louis XIV’s army. For ten points, name this conflict that ended when Philip V was recognized as king of a certain Iberian country.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession BONUS: After the War of the Spanish Succession, the Duke of Ormonde was accused of treason for his alleged support of this

289. FBI stands for the Federal Bureau of what?
Answer: Investigation

290. Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were executed for giving American secrets to what country?
Answer: Soviet Union (

291. J. Robert Oppenheimer was the head of a nuclear weapons project named for what New York City borough?
Answer: Manhattan

292. The Stasi was a repressive secret police agency in what European country?
Answer: East Germany (

293. American pilot Francis Gary Powers was flying what kind of spy plane when he was shot down over the USSR?
Answer: U-­‐2A (

294. US State Department official accused by Whittaker Chambers of hiding secrets in a pumpkin.
Answer: Alger Hiss

295. City where spies crossed a national border at Checkpoint Charlie.
Answer: Berlin

296. Kim Philby and Donald Maclean were two of a group of five spies recruited from what university in the 1930s?
Answer: Cambridge Page 6

297. “Virgin Queen” of England who died in 1603, ending the House of Tudor.
Answer: Elizabeth I (

298. Type of disaster that destroyed St. Paul’s Cathedral and thousands of houses in London in 1666.
Answer: Great Fire of London

299. Architect who re-­‐designed St. Paul’s and dozens of other churches after that disaster.
Answer: Sir Christopher Wren

300. Playwright who died in the early part of the century after retiring to Stratford upon Avon.
Answer: William Shakespeare

301. Name of the Royal House that succeeded the Tudors.
Answer: Stuart

302. Religious group that, according to Titus Oates, supposedly planned the Popish Plot to assassinate the king in 1678.
Answer: Roman Catholics (

303. King of England overthrown by William and Mary in the 1688 Glorious Revolution.
Answer: James II of England (

304. Acts that required public employees to be members of the Church of England, opposed by that king.
Answer: Test Act(s) Page 7

305. Country with capital Ankara that was borne out of the fallen empire.
Answer: Turkey

306. Secular founder of that country who fought in World War I.
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

307. Battle where that founder defended the Dardanelles against a British amphibious attack, a major Ottoman victory.
Answer: Battle of Gallipoli

308. Country that gained its independence from the Ottomans in 1832 after fighting in Athens.
Answer: Greece

309. Elite Ottoman infantrymen who were kidnapped as young boys and forcibly converted to Islam.
Answer: janissary

310. Ethnic group subjected to a genocide by the Ottomans during World War I.
Answer: Armenians

311. Russian tsar who fought the Pruth River Campaign against the Ottomans.
Answer: Peter the Great (

312. Khedive [kay-­‐deev] who founded modern Egypt out of the Ottoman Empire who shares his name with a boxer.
Answer: Muhammad Ali Pasha (or Mehmet Ali Pasha

313. During this event, negotiations were mediated by U Thant, and Adlai Stevenson famously agitated for an answer from Valerian Zorin. This event was ended with the removal of (+) Jupiter weapon systems from Turkey, and it led to the creation of the Moscow-­‐Washington hotline (*). For ten points, name this 1962 crisis in which the Soviet Union attempted to place weapons on a Caribbean island.
Answer: Cuban Missile Crisis (

314. To reduce ethnic conflicts in this country, its law mandates that its president must be a Sunni Muslim and its prime minister must be a (+) Maronite Christian. This country was invaded in 2006 after Hassan Nasrallah organized numerous cross-­‐border ambushes against (*) Israeli villages. For ten points, name this country where Hezbollah is based in Beirut.
Answer: Lebanon

315. In a legend from this country, a woman who tries to ride her newlywed husband’s horse is thrown off and bounces on her skirt all the way to the moon. Slue-­‐Foot (+) Sue rode a catfish down a river in this country, and a man in this country dies after beating a steam powered hammer in a steel-­‐driving contest. (*) Pecos Bill and John Henry are two characters from the folklore of, for ten points, what country where Paul Bunyan’s birth supposedly occurred in Wisconsin or Minnesota?
Answer: United

316. This commander ordered the building of Portugal’s Lines of Torres Vedras, a defense against Andre Massena approved by (+) Lord Castlereagh; two years later, this man routed Auguste Marmont at Salamanca, a key battle of the Peninsular War. In 1815, this commander’s forces were joined by Gebhard von Blucher’s Prussian troops near (*) Brussels in his most crucial victory. For ten points, name this British general who defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo.
Answer: Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (

317. This city was the final home of a composer who depicted the mistress of Nero in The Coronation of Poppea. Claudio Monteverdi worked in this city, where the (+) Ospedale della Pieta employed the “Red Priest” who composed The Four Seasons. (*) Antonio Vivaldi lived in, for ten points, what Italian city where opera was staged during Carnival and the barcarole was sung by gondoliers rowing along its canals?
Answer: Venice Page 9

318. Two of these figures, Mushka and Pchyolka, were purposely killed in 1960 to prevent foreign powers from inspecting their (+) vehicle. The most famous of these figures was locked in a box for weeks of training and died of overheating after a separation failure, having completed four (*) orbits aboard Sputnik 2. Laika was one of, for ten points, what animals that the Soviets trained to be cosmonauts?
Answer: Soviet space dogs (

319. The first female ruler of an Asian nation, Queen Anula, ruled the Anuradhapura kingdom in what is now this country. (+) The Pali Canon, an ancient Buddhist scripture, was recorded in this country after being composed in northern India. (*) Kandy was the last independent kingdom in this modern country, which is connected to the mainland by Adam’s Bridge. For ten points, name this island country, known as Ceylon during its British occupation, found off the coast of India.
Answer: Sri Lanka

320. On the day that this man said “Let us have faith that right makes might” in the Cooper Union speech, he was photographed at (+) Mathew Brady’s studio in New York. The Piccirilli brothers carved a sculpture of this man that had been designed by Daniel Chester French; that sculpture is the focus of a memorial at the west end of a reflecting pool on the (*) National Mall. For ten points, name this American president whose memorial building in Washington, DC features inscriptions of the Gettysburg Address.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln

321. This route was first trekked by the crew of the Tonquin and Wilson Price Hunt, who would go on to establish Fort Astoria here. This route branched off to Montana via the (+) Bozeman route and to Utah via the Mormon trail. One wagon route went as far as Fort Hall on this trail, which eventually stretched past the Cascade Mountains into the (*) Willamette Valley. For ten points, name this 19th century trail that connected Missouri to the Pacific Northwest.
Answer: Oregon Trail BONUS: The House of Wisdom, an Islamic Golden Age-­‐era center of learning, was built by Harun al-­‐Rashid in what city, the capital of modern Iraq? Baghdad Page 10

322. This government was founded after its leader won the Battle of Sekigahara against the Toyotomi clan. This government’s policy of sakoku came to an end when Matthew Perry’s Black Ships forced the opening of Japan through the 1854 Convention of Kanagawa. For ten points, name this last Japanese shogunate.
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu)

323. Xenophon’s Anabasis describes ten thousand Greek soldiers of this type who fought Artaxerxes II of Persia. A war named for these people was won by Hamilcar Barca and led to his conquest of Spain. Famed soldiers of this type include slingers from Rhodes and archers from Crete. Greeks who fought for Persia were, for ten points, what type of soldier that fought not for national pride, but for money?
Answer: mercenary (

324. The Dartmouth, the Eleanor, and the Beaver carried this commodity from England to the American colonies. The Intolerable Acts were passed in response to the dumping of this commodity into a Massachusetts Harbor in 1773 by members of the Sons of Liberty. For ten points, identify this commodity destroyed in a namesake Boston party.
Answer: tea (

325. This location is the setting of a photo of a boy holding a toy hand grenade by Diane Arbus. Belvedere Castle and the Strawberry Fields memorial to John Lennon are located in this park, which was outlined in the Greensward Plan by Calvert Vaux [voh] and Frederick Law Olmsted. For ten points, what is this large park whose name indicates its position in the middle of Manhattan?
Answer: Central Park (

326. This city was one of first sites for rubber to be grown outside of South America, as part of a botanical research project at Kew. This city’s Crystal Palace stood in its Hyde Park until 1936 and was opened in 1851 by Queen Victoria. Sewage was once pumped into the River Thames in, for ten points, what capital city of England?
Answer: London

327. This island is home to a distinctive type of pottery known as the “kamares ware,” examples of which are on display in Heraklion. The Thera volcanic eruption may have ended a civilization on this island, where frescos depicting a bull-­‐leaping motif are common at the palace of Knossos. For ten points, name this largest Greek island, the center of the Minoan civilization.
Answer: Crete Page 1

328. One of these people is the subject of Robert Browning’s poem Sordello. William IX, Duke of Aquitaine is often called the first of these people, whose primary output consisted of cansos and sirventes and who often used the Occitan language to tell stories about chivalrous themes. For ten points, name these medieval European poets who wrote songs of courtly love.
Answer: troubadours (

329. Charles Colson admitted this man had told him that a typewriter was fabricated in the Alger Hiss case. This politician sabotaged peace talks in Vietnam, promising better results after this man defeated Hubert Humphrey in the 1968 election. For ten points, name this US President who withdrew the US from Vietnam in 1973.
Answer: Richard Nixon

330. Twelve “captains and defenders of liberty” were elected to write this city’s laws when it was briefly reorganized into the Golden Ambrosian Republic following the fall of the Visconti family. After that republic fell, this city was ruled by the Sforzas. For ten points, name this capital of Lombardy, a city in Northern Italy.
Answer: Milan

331. Oliver Cromwell ended a policy whereby these people had been banned from England since the reign of Edward I. The Balfour Declaration pledged support for the creation of a homeland for these people in the Middle East. For ten points, name this religious group whose British members have included Benjamin Disraeli.
Answer: Jewish people Page 2

332. A group of telepathic youths hold a conference in this country in a novel in which Saleem Sinai was born at the exact moment of this country’s independence. That novel, Midnight’s Children, is set at the time when this country, along with its western neighbor, Pakistan, was partitioned and split off from the British Empire. For ten points, name this country, whose much earlier classical literature was often written in Sanskrit.
Answer: India BONUS: Rabindranath Tagore was an Indian poet who wrote in which language spoken by over 100 million people in Eastern India and Bangladesh? Bengali

333. Brocken Peak in this country’s Harz Mountains is said to be the site of witches’ meetings on Walpurgisnacht. An annual festival in the Theresienwiese originally celebrated a wedding, but today mostly celebrates this country’s consumption of bratwurst and beer. For ten points, name this country where Oktoberfest celebrations are the world’s largest annual festival.
Answer: Federal Republic of Germany BONUS: Carnival has long been celebrated throughout Germany as well, but particularly so in which predominantly Catholic city, the largest in North Rhine Westphalia? This city’s name is the same as a type of fragrance which is produced here. Cologne (

334. This country subsidized possibly non-­‐existent gold in the Goldenberg Scandal. This country’s Kalenjin people came to power and discriminated against its Kikuyu ethnic group. This country’s Westgate shopping mall was attacked in 2013 by Al-­‐Shabaab, a terrorist group based in neighboring Somalia. For ten points, name this east African country led by Uhuru Kenyatta.
Answer: Kenya BONUS: Dedan Kimathi led the Kikuyu people in a

335. Every autumn in this city, the krypteia were permitted to slaughter slaves to prevent events like the Messenian Wars and other helot uprisings. This city’s agoge [uh-­‐goh-­‐gay] system trained boys from the age of 7 into this city’s elite military. For ten points, name this ancient Greek city-­‐state whose army fought Athens in the Peloponnesian War.
Answer: Sparta (or Lacedaemonia) Page 3

336. In 1341, a holder of this title instituted a salt tax called the gabelle. This title was promised to Henry V at the Treaty of Troyes and was split from the Kingdom of Navarre by Joan II. The next holder of this position was known as the dauphin. After 987, holders of this position were descended from Hugh Capet. For ten points, name this royal title held by eighteen different men with regnal name Louis.
Answer: King of France (

337. Demilitarization along this border was planned by the Rush-­‐Bagot Treaty. Lumberjack infighting along this border led to the Aroostook War, which was ended by a treaty negotiated by Daniel Webster. This border was initially demarcated by the 1783 Treaty of Paris following the American Revolution. For ten points, name this border whose eastern end lies between Maine and New Brunswick.
Answer: the border between Canada and the United

338. A symphony written during this war contains a passage parodying a Franz Lehar tune over a snare drum in its depiction of soldiers invading the title city. That Symphony No. 7 in C Major is dedicated to the 500 thousand citizens who died in that 900 day siege during this war. For ten points, name this war in which Dmitry Shostakovich wrote his Seventh Symphony, depicting the siege of Leningrad by Nazi Germany.
Answer: World War II BONUS: Another musical composition inspired by World War II was a dissonant Krzysztof Penderecki [chris-­‐toff pen-­‐der-­‐etz-­‐kee] piece for 52 strings entitled Threnody to the Victims of what Asian city? Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima Page 4

339. John Logie Baird pioneered the mechanical type of this device, which was improved upon by devices using image dissector tubes. Philo Farnsworth invented the electric version of this device, which contained cathode ray tubes that use superimposed red, green and blue to display color. For ten points, name this device whose early versions featured black and white broadcasts by NBC and CBS.
Answer: television (

340. Country whose Weimar Republic ultimately fell during the Depression.
Answer: Germany

341. New York street that was the center of the Stock Market crash.
Answer: Wall Street

342. Set of programs begun by Franklin Roosevelt in an attempt to offset the effects of the Great Depression.
Answer: New Deal

343. Standard that every major world currency left during the Great Depression?
Answer: Gold

344. English king who insisted on the formation of the coalition “National government” in 1931.
Answer: George V

345. Country led by the inactive Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King who refused to respond as he believed the Depression would pass.
Answer: Canada

346. US president at the start of the Depression who was voted out of office in 1932
Answer: Herbert Hoover Page 6

347. Was assassinated in 44 BC after proclaiming himself dictator four years earlier.
Answer: Gaius Julius Caesar (

348. Became the first emperor of Rome.
Answer: Augustus Caesar (or Octavian

349. Wrote the Stoic work Meditations and was the last of the Five Good Emperors.
Answer: Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus

350. Allied with Cassius at the Battle of Philippi, where he was defeated by the Second Triumvirate?
Answer: Marcus Junius Brutus

351. Defeated the Mediterranean pirates before joining the First Triumvirate.
Answer: Pompey the Great (or Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus)

352. Died invading Parthia at the Battle of Carrhae and was known as the richest man in Rome.
Answer: Marcus Licinius Crassus

353. Defeated the Sicilian Revolt and governed Africa as a member of the Second Triumvirate.
Answer: Marcus Aemilius Lepidus

354. Followed his brother Gaius, both in pushing for land reforms and being assassinated by senators.
Answer: Tiberius Gracchus the Younger (

355. River that nourished ancient Egyptian culture and is divided into “white” and “blue” portions.
Answer: Nile River

356. Species of dung beetle worshipped by the ancient Egyptians.
Answer: scarab (

357. Pharaoh who died at the age of 18 and whose tomb was discovered in 1922 by Howard Carter.
Answer: King Tutankhamun (

358. Egyptian symbol of “life,” resembling a cross with a handle, that is carried in depictions of almost every Egyptian pharaoh.
Answer: ankh

359. Wife of Thutmose II who served as the second female pharaoh in history.
Answer: Hatshepsut

360. Royal necropolis opposite Thebes, a major burial site that contains 63 discovered tombs of pharaohs and Egyptian nobles.
Answer: Valley of the Kings (

361. Pharaoh who established a sun-­‐worshipping cult in the 14th century BC.
Answer: Akhenaten (or Amenhotep IV

362. City where that sun-­‐worshipping cult was centered, and which names a style of New Kingdom art.
Answer: Amarna (

363. In 2015, members of this group noted “It. Just. Isn’t. That. Good.” in their two-­‐star review of In the Aeroplane Over the Sea by Neutral Milk Hotel. That review was labeled “Disgusting” by a website that later praised a US State Department effort to counter this group: a world map with the US (+) shrunk to be too small for this group to find. In real life, a member of this group used the caption “We respawn in Jannah” in an (*) Instagram post referencing Call of Duty, one of its numerous recruitment attempts over social media. Clickhole.com frequently lampoons, for ten points, what terrorist group that lost control of Mosul in July 2017?
Answer: ISIS (or Islamic

364. This organization, which was wiped out after the Battle of Aegospotami, was based at a city guarded by the Long Walls (+), Piraeus. This organization withdrew from the Battle of Cape Artemisium and later won the decisive Battle of (*) Salamis, driving the Persians from Greece. Themistocles advocated for the expansion of, for ten points, what military force whose triremes ensured the Delian League’s control of the Aegean Sea?
Answer: navy of ancient Athens (

365. The memorial site of Castle Hill in this region is sometimes named after Alexander Baranov, who established a provisional capital here in the early 1800s after defeating Tlingit natives. This region’s ports of (+) Dyea and Skagway boomed in the 1890s as through points for gold prospectors. Sitka was the (*) Russian territorial capital of this region, which was acquired by the U.S. in 1867 in a move dubbed Seward’s Folly. For ten points, name this modern US state home to the cities of Fairbanks and Anchorage.
Answer: Alaska

366. The Luxembourg Compromise ended this leader’s withdrawal from the European Economic Community during the Empty Chair Crisis. In another role, this leader advocated for a mobile professional force in The (+) Army of the Future, panning his nation’s usage of the Maginot Line. After Philippe (*) Petain took power as the head of the Vichy puppet state, this man led his country’s “Free” forces against the Nazis during World War II. For ten points, name this first president of the French Fifth Republic.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

367. Claude Levi-­‐Strauss’s Triste Tropiques [treest troh-­‐PEEK] focuses primarily on this non-­‐Asian country, which recently surpassed New (+) Guinea in having the most uncontacted peoples within its borders. After declaring independence in 1822, an empire was established in this country that lasted until an 1889 coup overthrew Dom (*) Pedro II. Shantytowns called “favelas” dot the urban landscape of cities like Sao Paolo and Rio de Janeiro in, for ten points, what Portuguese-­‐ speaking South American country?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil Page 9

368. This facility is officially designated NSF Thurmont and was known as “Shangri-­‐La” in the 1940s. In 1978, this facility (+) hosted meetings that created two frameworks: the first was condemned by the UN, but the second earned Menachim (*) Begin and Anwar Sadat a shared Nobel Prize. For ten points, name this Maryland facility, a Presidential retreat where Jimmy Carter hosted Middle East peace talks that produced a set of Accords.
Answer: Camp David (

369. This action was compared to “climb[ing] the highest mountain,” “fly[ing] the Atlantic,” in a 1962 (+) speech that noted “we choose to” do this “in this decade.” The development of the (*) Saturn V [five] propulsion system was instrumental in performing this action, which was last done by the Challenger lander in 1972. For ten points, name this exploration first done by Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong aboard Apollo 11.
Answer: going to the Moon (

370. After natives in what is now this country committed a ritual mass suicide known as puputan, the city of Klungkung fell to European colonists. A ruler of this country established a system called USDEK to implement (+) Guided Democracy; that system fell apart after the 30 September Movement and gave way to the New Order. Mohammad Hatta served as Vice President and Prime Minister for the (*) INP in, for ten points, what Asian country, once led by Sukarno and Suharto, whose capital is Jakarta?
Answer: Republic of Indonesia

371. This legislator’s first speech was to support the Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act 1960 as the representative of Finchley. This leader instituted a Community (+) Charge and was subject to a terrorist attack at a Brighton hotel. This leader resigned in favor of John (*) Major after an unpopular poll tax, which allowed the Conservatives to win the 1992 general election. For ten points, name this Conservative prime minister who defeated Argentina in the Falklands War and was nicknamed the “Iron Lady.”
Answer: Margaret Thatcher BONUS: British fishermen were killed in the Dogger Bank incident when what country’s navy accidentally fired on them, thinking they were Japanese? Russia (do not

372. The Genoese admiral Andrea Doria fought in this battle after a defeat at the Battle of Preveza. Six powerful galleasses were provided by Venice to this battle’s winning side, which was commanded by Don John, the brother of the Holy Roman Emperor Philip II. For ten points, name this decisive 1571 naval victory for a Christian alliance, stopping the Ottoman advance into the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Battle of Lepanto

373. This composer quoted “Der Landesvater” and the drinking song “Gaudeamus Igitur” in a piece written to celebrate an honorary doctorate from the University of Breslau. Hans von Bulow called this man’s first symphony “Beethoven’s Tenth.” The Academic Festival Overture was written by, for ten points, what German composer whose Wiegenlied [vee-­‐gen-­‐leed] is known as his “Lullaby?”
Answer: Johannes Brahms

374. Smedley Butler claimed that a conspiracy advocating this political ideology launched the Business Plot. The Silver Legion espoused this political ideology, sympathy for which was partially responsible for the cancellation of Father Coughlin’s radio show. For ten points, name this nationalist ideology held by American sympathizers of Germany and Italy in 1940.
Answer: fascism (

375. Millions of people journeyed to this location in February 2013 as part of a Kumbh Mela pilgrimage whose final destination was in Allahabad. Waters in this location are said to have purifying powers because they have touched Vishnu’s feet. For ten points, name this sacred river of Hinduism.
Answer: Ganges River (

376. As Prime Minister, this man was able to secure the passage of a bill which benefited Irish tenants, but was never able to secure home rule during his four terms. This man’s Midlothian Campaign attacked his rival, a Conservative politician with a close friendship with Queen Victoria. For ten points, name this Liberal Prime Minister who feuded with Benjamin Disraeli.
Answer: William Ewart Gladstone Page 1

377. This building was the site of an infamous jump by Franz Reichelt, whose parachute demonstration failed. This structure was derided as a “gigantic black smokestack” in a petition by the “Artists Protest,” which attempted to stop its construction. Maurice Koechlin and Emile Nouguier helped design this structure, found on the Champ de Mars, for the World’s Fair of 1889. For ten points, name this iconic wrought iron tower in Paris.
Answer: Eiffel Tower

378. Description acceptable. The construction of this location at Mount Li was described by Sima Qian [chee-­‐ ahn], who noted that streams of mercury flowed through it in an attempt to recreate the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers. This location was first discovered by workers digging a well in Xiyang [shee-­‐yahng]. To serve their master in the afterlife, thousands of terracotta warriors were placed in, for ten points, what resting place of the first emperor of unified China?
Answer: The Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor (

379. This program gained support after a report by Herbert Hoover deemed it was infeasible to turn one nation into a “pastoral state” without the migration of 25 million people. Greece and Turkey received the first part of a disbursement of 13 billion dollars under, for ten points, what American foreign policy to help rebuild postwar Europe, named for the US Secretary of State?
Answer: Marshall Plan (

380. One medieval philosopher from this country developed a “law of parsimony” that seeks to solve problems by working with the hypothesis with the fewest assumptions. That “razor” was developed by William of Ockham. For ten points, name this home country of Roger Bacon where medieval scholars studied at the University of Oxford.
Answer: England (or Great Britain or United Kingdom)

381. An opera titled for a person in this profession includes scenes entitled “Train,” “Bed,” and “Spaceship,” as well as interludes known as “knee plays” over the course of its five-­‐hour run time. A John Adams opera set at Los Alamos depicts people in this profession. For ten points, what profession is depicted in the operas Doctor Atomic and Philip Glass’s Einstein on the Beach?
Answer: scientists (

382. In May 2015, this country became the first to pass a referendum legalizing same-­‐sex marriage, and it is considering another referendum to repeal the abortion-­‐forbidding Article 9 of its constitution. Leo Varadkar’s elevation as leader of this country made him the first biracial leader of a European country, and the first LGBT person to hold the title of Taoiseach [tee-­‐shuck]. For ten points, name this country where Varadkar leads Fine Gael [finn-­‐neh GALE], the rival party to Fianna Fail [fee-­‐uh-­‐nuh FOIL] and Sinn Fein [shin FAYN] in Dublin.
Answer: Republic of Ireland (do not

383. In one speech, this man was accused of turning ministers into marionnettes by Vladimir Purishkevich, who soon agreed to aid Prince Felix Yusupov in putting this man to death. This man rose to power after providing medical guidance to Alexandra Feodorovna [fay-­‐oh-­‐dor-­‐ohv-­‐na], but this man was eventually poisoned, beaten, shot, and then drowned by nobles who believed he had undue influence over the Romanov family. For ten points, name this Russian mystic and advisor to Nicholas II.
Answer: Grigori Rasputin BONUS: Rasputin’s medical advice concerned the hemophilia suffered by this son of Alexandra and Nicholas II. This brother of Olga, Tatiana, Maria, and Anastasia died in the

384. One general’s inaction while in this state led to the Conway Cabal plot, which aimed to replace him with Horatio Gates. This state also served as Washington’s winter quarters for the Continental Army from 1777 to 1778 at Valley Forge. For ten points, what state was the location of the signing of the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia?
Answer: Pennsylvania BONUS: What important Washington, D.C. edifice is located at

385. This ruler created an administrative system with 33 ranks and a standardized system of payment called the mansabdari system. The Din-­‐i-­‐Ilahi syncretic religion, founded by this ruler, replaced Islam as the state religion. This son of Humayun defeated the Hindu king Hemu at the Second Battle of Panipat. For ten points, name this third Mughal emperor, the grandson of Babur.
Answer: Akbar the Great BONUS: Akbar’s policies of religious toleration included a temporary end to this tax, which was levied on non-­‐Muslims. Later Mughal rulers resumed this tax. jizya tax

386. The god Mithras is often portrayed sacrificing one of these animals in reliefs, such as one in Vienna’s Kunsthistoriches Museum. A woman holding pink fabric grabs onto a swimming, white one of these animals in Titian’s Rape of Europa. In Hindu myth, Shiva’s mount is one of these animals named Nandi. Scenes from frescos found at the Palace of Knossos depict youths jumping over the horns of, for ten points, what bovine animal represented by the constellation Taurus?
Answer: bulls (

387. Aulus Hirtius and Vibius Pansa died while fighting against this man’s army, which was busy besieging Decimus Brutus at Mutina. This man, who split his territory between his children in the Donations of Alexandria, was the third and final husband of Fulvia. In 31 BC, this man fled from the Battle of Actium after the retreat of his lover, Cleopatra. For ten points, name this protege of Julius Caesar who lost a civil war to Octavian.
Answer: Mark Antony (or Marcus Antonius) BONUS: In the aforementioned Donations of Alexandria, Marc Antony gave control of Egypt to Cleopatra and this man, a son of Cleopatra and Julius Caesar, who ultimately served as the last pharaoh of Egypt. Caesarion (

388. This dynasty’s rise to power was cemented at the Battle of Lake Poyang, one of the largest naval battles in history. Architectural projects undertaken during this dynasty included the Porcelain Tower of Nanjing and the fortification of the Great Wall of China. During this dynasty, the Muslim eunuch Zheng He led massive voyages throughout the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty preceded by the Mongol Yuan and succeeded by the Manchu Qing.
Answer: Ming Dynasty BONUS: The Ming Dynasty was founded by this man, a peasant who led forces against the Yuan in the Red Turban Rebellion and established the capital at Nanjing. Hongwu Emperor (or Zhu Yuanzhang)

389. This character says that “a good heart” is more like the sun than the moon because it always shines brightly; that speech woos his future wife, who returns his affections in French because she cannot speak English. This character, who announces “Once more unto the breach, dear friends” at the siege of Harfleur, urges “We few, we happy few, we band of brothers” into battle in a fourth act speech. For ten points, name this Shakespearean character, an English king who marries Catherine of Valois after winning at Agincourt.
Answer: Henry V (

390. Largest city by population in Australia just north of the first colony at Botany Bay.
Answer: Sydney

391. Capital of Western Australia from which a non-­‐stop route to London was recently launched.
Answer: Perth

392. Prime Minister of Australia since 2015.
Answer: Malcolm Turnbull

393. Second largest city in Australia, which hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics.
Answer: Melbourne

394. Nationality of Willem Janszoon, the first European to site Australia.
Answer: Dutch (

395. Australian state once called Van Diemen’s Land.
Answer: Tasmania

396. Unofficial national anthem, a bush poem by Banjo Paterson.
Answer: Waltzing Matilda

397. “Australian Robin Hood,” a gang leader and legendary outlaw who wore a bulletproof suit in his final shootout.
Answer: Edward “Ned” Kelly Page 6

398. The main government complex in Moscow, as well as a type of fortress in general.
Answer: Kremlin

399. The faction that split from the Mensheviks in the Russian Revolution, from the Russian for “majority.”
Answer: Bolsheviks

400. “Restructuring,” that paired with “glasnost” as a means of reform in the late Soviet Union.
Answer: perestroika

401. A Soviet prison labor camp, derived from an acronym for the system.
Answer: gulag

402. A former newspaper of the Communist Party whose name translates to “Truth.”
Answer: Pravda

403. Damaging material used to blackmail political opponents.
Answer: kompromat

404. The loyal police force of Ivan the Terrible, who killed thousands in Novgorod.
Answer: Oprichniki (

405. A seasonal second cottage in the countryside, gifted to party officials in the Soviet Union.
Answer: dacha Page 7

406. Holy city that Israel claims as its capital, recognized by Donald Trump in 2017.
Answer: Jerusalem

407. Financial capital of Israel, the city where most countries maintain their embassies.
Answer: Tel Aviv

408. Empire that governed Israel as the province of Judea.
Answer: Roman Empire (or Rome)

409. Unicameral legislative body of Israel.
Answer: Knes

410. “Iron Lady” of Israel who served as its fourth Prime Minister.
Answer: Golda Meir (

411. Organizer of the IDF who served as the first Prime Minister of Israel.
Answer: David Ben-­‐Gurion

412. Prime Minister of Israel since 2009.
Answer: Benjamin Netanyahu

413. Father of modern Zionism who published The Jewish State and advocated a Jewish homeland in Uganda.
Answer: Theodor Herzl Page 8

414. The British branch of this movement was kickstarted by a Bryan Robertson exhibition at Whitechapel; among the works exhibited there were a collage of an advertisement for a vacuum next to a muscular man holding a (+) lollipop. One artist who worked in this movement used silk-­‐screening to repeatedly depict subjects like (*) Chairman Mao and Marilyn Monroe. For ten points, name this artistic movement that used subjects from mass-­‐media culture and included artists like Roy Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol.
Answer: Pop Art

415. In this modern day country, Johann Beaulieu was unable to defend a bridgehead over the river Adda at Lodi [loh-­‐dee]; this set-­‐back, along with Joseph Alvinzci’s defeat at Arcole [ar-­‐co-­‐lay] in this modern day country, ensured that the First (+) Coalition would have to accept the creation of the Ligurian Republic. Another battle in this modern day country, the Battle of (*) Marengo, began when a commander led his troops atop a donkey through the St. Bernard Pass. For ten points, name this modern-­‐day country where Napoleon crossed the Alps to score a victory near Piedmont.
Answer: Italy

416. A government began resettling this group to the manmade island of Thengar Char in January 2017, much to the dismay of (+) human rights groups. The United Nations said it was “very likely” that crimes against humanity were taking place against these people, who primarily live in (*) Rakhine State, north of the Bay of Bengal. Aung San Suu Kyi [chee] has been heavily criticized for her silence on the persecution of, for ten points, what Muslim ethnic group that mostly lives in Burma?
Answer: Rohingya people (

417. Sequels to this Nineteenth Century novel include Twenty Years After and The Vicomte of Bragelonne. A central plot point of this novel is the recovery of a group of diamond studs that Queen (+) Anne is asked to wear to a royal party. In this novel, Milady de Winter acts as an agent of (*) Cardinal Richelieu and vengefully poisons the woman who falls in love with D’Artagnan [dar-­‐tan-­‐ yan]. For ten points, identify this Alexandre Dumas novel named after a trio of French soldiers.
Answer: The Three Musketeers (or Les Trois Mousquetaires)

418. A leader of this country gained controversy for nationalizing the copper industry, and later committed suicide in La Moneda Palace after a successful coup against him (+) . Another ruler of this South American country implemented neoliberal economic policies with the help of the so-­‐ called Chicago Boys and (*) with CIA backing, brutally suppressed political dissent in Operation Condor. For ten points, name this Pacific-­‐coast country led by Salvador Allende and Augusto Pinochet.
Answer: Republic of Chile Page 9

419. This figure’s literary rights were bequeathed to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which he helped establish. This man (+) signed a 1939 letter written by Leo Szilard [zee-­‐lard] that was sent to President Roosevelt, warning him of the threat of (*) German nuclear bombs. For ten points, name this physicist who won a Nobel Prize for his work on the photoelectric effect and who also developed the theory of special relativity.
Answer: Albert Einstein

420. The first instance of NATO active combat occurred during this war’s Banja Luka incident, part of Operation Deny Flight. Signs reading “pazi,” meaning “watch out,” were put up in “Sniper (+) Alley” during this war. Ratko Mladic [m’lah-­‐ditch] was convicted of crimes against humanity for his command during the Srebrenica [sreh-­‐breh-­‐neet-­‐zah] Massacre during this war, which was ended by the (*) Dayton Agreement in 1995. For ten points, name this war during the breakup of Yugoslavia that included the Siege of Sarajevo.
Answer: Bosnian War (

421. To celebrate President Obama’s 2008 election, this city re-­‐named part of its Delmar Boulevard for him. The first Olympic Games held in the U.S. occurred in this city concurrent with its hosting of the 1904 World’s Fair. (+) In 1985, this city’s baseball team, the Cardinals played its in-­‐state rivals, the Kansas City Royals in the World Series. (*) A Charles Lindbergh plane was called the spirit of, for ten points, what major city in eastern Missouri?
Answer: St. Louis

422. Edwin Walker was possibly attacked by this man, who mail-­‐ordered a Carcano (+) rifle under the name A. Hidell. This man was interviewed by Richard Snyder after he renounced his citizenship and defected to the Soviet Union. John (*) Connally was seriously wounded by this man, who shot him from the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository. For ten points, name this disgraced Marine who, on November 22, 1963, assassinated John F. Kennedy.
Answer: Lee Harvey Oswald BONUS: What European micro

423. This event was fueled by a speech noting that demonstrations “should not be prepared or organized” but “are not to be hampered” and was triggered after Herschel Grynszpan assassinated diplomat Ernst vom Rath. SA Brownshirts carried out, for ten points, what massive attack on the night of November 9, 1938 against Jewish stores and synagogues in Germany?
Answer: Kristallnacht (or the Night of Broken Glass)

424. This complex is the site of a bas-­‐relief showing Vasuki being pulled by 92 asuras and 88 devas in the “Churning of the Sea of Milk.” This complex was built to resemble Mount Meru and dedicated to Vishnu as a Hindu temple by Suryavarman II, but was later transformed into a Buddhist temple. For ten points, name this Khmer temple complex in Cambodia.
Answer: Angkor Wat

425. This country, which faced the 1918 Aster Revolution, was the site of a very short-­‐lived Soviet Republic led by Bela Kun. This country’s Transdanubian region is the site of Central Europe’s largest lake, Lake Balaton. During World War II, Miklos Horthy was a regent of, for ten points, what European country that was ruled by the medieval Arpad dynasty and, until World War I, part of a dual monarchy with Austria?
Answer: Kingdom of Hungary (

426. In this country, independence leader and human rights activist Hannah Kudjoe created an anti-­‐nudity campaign and distributed clothes. The “Motion of Destiny” speech called for the independence of this nation, where the Akosombo dam was built on the Volta River by Kwame Nkrumah. The British colony of Gold Coast controlled what is now, for ten points, what West African country governed from Accra?
Answer: Ghana

427. This country’s capital means red hero in its primary language, and a southern offshoot of the Trans-­‐ Siberian Railroad was built through this country. This country was allied with the Soviet Union during the Cold War, and served as a buffer state between it and China. For ten points, name this least densely populated country in the world which overthrew its communist regime in Ulan Bator at the end of the Cold War.
Answer: Mongolia

428. The bottom-­‐central panel of a Van Eyck work shows one of these animals circled by angels and bleeding into a goblet, known as the Adoration of a Mystic one of these animals. This animal symbolizes Jesus’ sacrifice in the Ghent Altarpiece’s depiction of the Agnus Dei. For ten points, name this herd animal that is often shown in artistic depictions of the Good Shepherd. Page 1IHBB Alpha Bowl 2017-­‐2018 Bowl Round 7
Answer: lambs (or sheep

429. This ruler defeated Quintus Cerialis at Camulodunum after launching a campaign in response to Roman refusal to honor the will of Prasutagus, but the eventual arrival of Suetonius led to this ruler’s defeat at Watling Street near Londinium. The Nero-­‐era revolt of the Iceni was led by, for ten points, what queen who fought the Romans over control of Britain in AD 60?
Answer: Boudica

430. A so-­‐called “country” in this state, centered around the Atchafalaya River and the city of Lafayette, was settled by French speakers who were removed from present-­‐day Nova Scotia in the Great Expulsion. Cajuns settled in, for ten points, what state that contains the Mississippi River Delta and was the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans?
Answer: Louisiana

431. This man stored the remains of his long-­‐time ally, Rwandan President Juvenal Habyarimana, at his palace in Gbadolite, this politician’s so-­‐called “Versailles of the Jungle.” This leader deposed Patrice Lumumba and was deposed himself by Laurent Kabila in 1997. This leader changed his own name to establish pro-­‐Africa cultural awareness and changed the name of his country to Zaire. For ten points, name this leopard print hat-­‐wearing dictator who ruled in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Answer: Joseph Desire Mobutu (or Mobutu Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu Wa Za Banga)

432. This man proposed a new holiday, Restoration of Sovereignty Day, first celebrated in 2013. This leader planned an increase in the consumption tax as part of the Three Arrows, his signature economic plan. This leader rules in partnership with the Komeito Party and succeeded Junichiro Koizumi in his current post. For ten points name this current prime minister of Japan.
Answer: Shinzo Abe ([ah-­‐bay], but be lenient) Page 2

433. Though this ruler signed the Treaty of Amasya to end an inconclusive war with the Safavid Empire, he was more successful in forcing the Knights Hospitaller out of Rhodes to gain control of the Mediterranean. This ruler was victorious at the Battle of Mohacs [moh-­‐hotch] over Louis II of Hungary while expanding into Europe. For ten points, name this longest reigning Ottoman sultan, known as “the Magnificent.”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I) BONUS: Suleiman’s campaigns were aided by this red bearded Ottoman admiral, who was victorious at the Battle of Preveza against the Holy League but lost Tunis to Charles V. This man shares his name with the codename of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union. Hayreddin Barbarossa

434. This author was a close friend and travel companion of Elizabeth Campbell, the Duchess of Argyll. This author, who painted an unflattering portrait of Aaron Burr in The Minister’s Wooing, also wrote a novel in which Eva St. Clair urges those around her to convert to Christianity and Simon Legree orders one of his slaves to be beaten to death. For ten points, name this author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
Answer: Harriet Beecher Stowe BONUS: During her last years, Stowe lived in Hartford, Connecticut, next door to this author of works such as A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court and The Prince and the Pauper. Mark Twain (

435. One of this man’s failed investments led to Jim and Susan McDougal being investigated by independent counsel Kenneth Starr. Proceedings in a lawsuit filed by Paula Jones against this man were cited in charges of perjury and obstruction of justice brought before the Senate in 1999. For ten points, name this politician whose sexual misconduct led to the second US Presidential impeachment trial in history.
Answer: William Jefferson “Bill” Clinton (

436. The Oran Massacre began in this country on its independence day, and was used as justification by Jean Bastien-­‐Thiry to attempt the assassination of Charles de Gaulle. Ahmed Ben Bella led the FLN in this country, which signed the Evian Accords to gain independence. For ten points, name this former French colony in North Africa.
Answer: Algeria BONUS: Which other North African country has made plans to build Africa’s first high speed train lines to connect cities such as Marrakesh and Casablanca? Morocco

437. One composer from this country used time signatures like 5/2 and 2/1 [five-­‐two and two-­‐one] for an overture based on the Obhikod liturgical chants. The works of Viktor Hartmann inspired another composer from this country to write a suite whose final movement depicts an unbuilt celebratory gate. Cesar Cui joined those two composers in the “Mighty Handful,” a group of five composers that celebrated this country’s music. For ten points, name this country where Pictures at an Exhibition was composed by Modest Mussorgsky and edited by Nikolai Rimsky-­‐Korsakov.
Answer: Russia (do not

438. A member of this family became King of the Romans after beating his rival Ottokar II of Bohemia. A severe jaw deformation was present among many members of this family, a genetic defect caused by numerous inter-­‐marriages. The 1713 Pragmatic Sanction was created by this family, whose members included Philip II and Maria Theresa. For ten points, name this European house, originally from Austria, that once ruled Spain and the Holy Roman Empire.
Answer: House of Habsburg (or House of Hapsburg

439. Description acceptable. Descartes [day-­‐kart] posited that “clear and distinct ideas” must be true because of this idea. Teleological arguments for this idea include the watchmaker analogy. Saint Anselm of Canterbury first laid out the ontological argument for this position, which is often debated against by invoking the problem of evil. For ten points, name this philosophical position that is rejected by atheists.
Answer: the existence of God (

440. In 2010, Thomas Hagan was formally paroled for his murder of this man, who gave the “Ballot or the Bullet” speech in 1964. This man took the name name Detroit Red as a criminal; while imprisoned for robbery, he adopted the teachings of Elijah Muhammad. For ten points, name this civil rights activist and member of Nation of Islam who replaced his given surname Little with a single letter.
Answer: Malcolm X (

441. Fascist generalissimo who won the war.
Answer: Francisco Franco

442. Basque town whose 1937 bombing was depicted by Pablo Picasso.
Answer: Guernica

443. Former country whose communist government sent Russian speaking advisors to help the Republican forces.
Answer: Soviet Union or USSR

444. US President who named an International Brigade that fought in the war.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln (Brigade)

445. Capital of Spain which finally fell to the fascists, ending the war.
Answer: Madrid

446. Force of sympathizers that Emile Mola claimed would help him undermine Madrid’s defenses.
Answer: Fifth Column (or Quinta Columna)

447. Arm of the Luftwaffe that was sent to aid the fascists.
Answer: Condor Legion

448. Nationalist leader of the Falange whose execution sparked great outrage during the war.
Answer: Jose Antonio Primo de Rivera (

449. Country north of England that gave Edward I his nickname and whose army was later led by William Wallace.
Answer: Scotland

450. English king who fathered Edward VI with Jane Seymour, one of his six wives.
Answer: Henry VIII [8]

451. London church where Edward II knighted over 200 men in the Feast of the Swans, and where all English monarchs have been crowned since 1066.
Answer: Westminster Abbey (

452. Modern ruling house of England whose first monarch was Edward VII.
Answer: House of Windsor (

453. English prince who won at Crecy and Poitiers [pwa-­‐tee-­‐ay] during the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Edward the Black Prince (or Edward of Woodstock)

454. King who imprisoned princes Edward V and Richard of Shrewsbury in the Tower of London in 1483.
Answer: Richard III

455. English king who abdicated the throne in the 1930’s after falling in love with an American woman.
Answer: Edward VIII or the Duke of Windsor

456. Religiously named king whose death in 1066 set off a struggle for the throne leading to the Norman Conquest.
Answer: Edward the Confessor Page 7

457. German capital city where an 1884 conference attempted to organize the Scramble.
Answer: Berlin Conference

458. German chancellor who proposed that 1884 conference.
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

459. South African empire that fought the battles of Rorke’s Drift, Ulundi, and Isandlwana against the British.
Answer: Zulu Empire (

460. Modern African country that defeated Italy at Adowa to win its independence.
Answer: Ethiopia

461. US protectorate country on the Atlantic coast that remained independent during the Scramble.
Answer: Liberia

462. Belgian king who personally owned the Congo Free State.
Answer: Leopold II (

463. Country whose “Pink Map” proposed a linking of its African colonies.
Answer: Portugal

464. 1898 incident that nearly led to war in Southern Sudan between Britain and France.
Answer: Fashoda Crisis (Incident, etc.) Page 8

465. The Boulevards of the Marshals is located in this city, which is divided into Rive Gauche [reev gohsh] and Rive Droite [reev dwot] regions. General von Choltitz refused orders from (+) Hitler to destroy this city. Leon Gambetta escaped this city via hot air balloon during an 1870 siege. Revolutionaries in this city seized weapons from (*) Les Invalides before storming the Bastille during the French Revolution. The Arc de Triomphe was built in, for the point, what city on the River Seine in France?
Answer: Paris

466. One of these systems known as FLOW-­‐MATIC was invented for laypeople by Grace Hopper. Alonzo Church’s lambda calculus serves as the basis for “functional” examples of these constructs, such as Haskell. As depicted in (+) Hidden Figures, NASA’s Dorothy Vaughn became an expert in one of these constructs known as Fortran. Microsoft’s first product was Altair, an interpreter for one of these constructs named (*) BASIC. Java, C, and Python are examples of, for ten points, what systems used to write source code, the instructions for a computer program?
Answer: computer programming languages (

467. A letter denouncing this meeting noted that the country was “offered a choice between war and shame. She has chosen shame and will get war.” (+) Edvard Benes resigned over this meeting, which resulted in the First Vienna Award. This meeting was proclaimed to have secured (*) “peace for our time” by Neville Chamberlain. For ten points, name this 1938 meeting in which the Allies appeased Germany by allowing Hitler to annex the Sudetenland.
Answer: Munich Conference

468. This country was led by Siad Barre during the Ogaden War. In the early 20th century, the “Mad (+) Mullah” founded a Dervish state in what is now this country, near where the Majeerteen sultanates had earlier ruled from Puntland. In 1993, when the US invaded this country’s capital to fight Mohamed Farah Aidid, two (*) Black Hawk helicopters were shot down. For ten points, name this country on the Horn of Africa where the Battle of Mogadishu took place.
Answer: Somalia

469. When Arthur Bonifas and Mark Barrett were killed in one of these regions in Korea, US forces responded with Operation (+) Paul Bunyan, the heavily supported cutting of a poplar tree that was supposedly planted by Kim Il-­‐Sung. (*) Panmunjom and a Joint Security Area are located in one of these areas along the 38th Parallel between North and South Korea. For ten points, give this term for buffer territory between hostile countries where military personnel are banned.
Answer: Demilitarized Zone (

470. This man asserted he was the rightful ruler of his country in a letter to Pope John XXII [22], the Declaration of Arbroath. This king was (+) excommunicated after murdering John Comyn at the church of the Greyfriars. This man besieged (*) Stirling Castle, forcing the Battle of Bannockburn. For ten points, name this victorious king of the First War of Scottish Independence.
Answer: Robert I (

471. The buildup to this war included the assassination of Kim Ok-­‐gyun, whose corpse was quartered and put on display as a warning, as well as a rebellion by several hundred thousand Donghak peasants. The losing side in this war lost the port city of (+) Weihaiwei after most of the Beiyang Fleet was devastated at the Battle of the Yalu Rvier. The Triple Intervention by France, Germany,, and (*) Russia ensured that the Liaodong Peninsula was not claimed by the winners of this war in its ending Treaty of Shimonoseki. For ten points, name this late 19th century war mostly fought in Korea, a victory for the Meiji Emperor over the Qing Empire.
Answer: First Sino-­‐Japanese War (

472. This ruler’s mother placed a nail in his helmet, believing it to be a nail from the crucifixion. This ruler and his mother, Helena, are revered as “Equal to the Apostles” in the Eastern (+) Orthodox Church. This ruler, who had his son Crispus and his wife Fausta executed in 326, believed he received a divine (*) sign before his victory at the Battle of Milvian Bridge. The Council of Nicaea was convened by, for ten points, what Roman emperor who promoted religious toleration with the Edict of Milan and converted the empire to Christianity?
Answer: Constantine the Great (or Constantine I) BONUS: Mahatma Gandhi’s

473. Early theories on this quantity were developed by Lazare Carnot [la-­‐zarr car-­‐noh], whose namesake cycle conserves this quantity. Ludwig Boltzmann’s tombstone has an equation for this quantity engraved on it. According to the second law of thermodynamics, this quantity always increases within isolated systems. For ten points, name this measure of disorder within a system.
Answer: entropy (

474. This ruler sent Agricola to govern Britain and extend Roman rule into Caledonia. This ruler was campaigning in Jerusalem when he learned of Vitellius’ ambitions to become emperor, prompting this man to return to Rome and end the Year of the Four Emperors. For ten points, name this man who founded the Flavian dynasty after the death of Nero.
Answer: Vespasian (or Titus Flavius Caesar Vespasianus Augustus, but do not

475. The establishment of these sites forced nearby inhabitants into lands called reductions, where they would continue to live when these sites were divided into the rancho system. Defended by royal forts called presidios, 21 of these sites were linked by El Camino Real [ree-­‐all]. Junipero Serra supervised conversion efforts at, for ten points, what Spanish religious outposts in California?
Answer: Spanish missions in California

476. This show displayed the caption “SORRY GIRLS, HE’S MARRIED” on February 9, 1964. Charles Laughton filled in as host of this show on the first night that this show featured Elvis Presley, although this show’s cameramen zoomed in to avoid broadcasting Elvis’s provocative dancing. For ten points, name this CBS show that ran until 1971 and which drew over 70 million viewers for its first broadcast of The Beatles.
Answer: The Ed Sullivan Show

477. This event concerned a document called the Bordereau, which had been forged by Major Henry. Ferdinand Esterazy’s role in this event was discovered by Georges Picquart a year after its initial suspect was imprisoned on Devil’s Island. Emile Zola wrote the letter J’accuse as a response to, for ten points, what 1890s affair in which a Jewish French army officer was falsely imprisoned for treason?
Answer: Dreyfus Affair Page 1

478. This country commemorates a deadly 1952 student protest on Language Movement Day. Yahya Khan launched Operation Searchlight to suppress the independence-­‐seeking Awami League in this country, which was known at the time as East Pakistan. For ten points, name this country that, after gaining its independence from Pakistan in 1971, established its capital at Dhaka.
Answer: Bangladesh (

479. This composer wrote the score to a film about a nonexistent soldier during the reign of Paul I, as well as the music for an Eisenstein historical epic, Ivan the Terrible, whose Part II was suppressed by Stalin. This composer of Lieutenant Kije [kee-­‐zhay] wrote a piece for narrator and orchestra in which the title boy’s grandfather is played by a bassoon and in which a canine swallows a duck whole. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of Peter and the Wolf.
Answer: Sergei Prokofiev

480. One philosopher from this school claimed that human mysticism was a particularly ineffable quality; that work used the example of George Fox and the Quakers to argue that the origins of a religion did not reflect its value. The author of Varieties of Religious Experience belonged to this school of thought, whose namesake maxim argued that the “practical effects” of your conception were critical to rational thought. Charles Sanders Peirce [”purse”] and William James helped found, for ten points, what American philosophical school?
Answer: pragmatism (

481. An injury this man suffered at the Battle of Calvi left him blind in one eye; years later, this man claimed he didn’t see a signal to retreat after raising his telescope to that eye. A 169 foot tall Corinthian column in central London commemorates this man’s most famous battle, in which he was killed aboard the Victory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.
Answer: Horatio (Lord) Nelson

482. This man confused the Lachine [la-­‐sheen] Rapids as the Northwest Passage to China. This explorer was the first to describe the land that Iroquois inhabitants lived in as “Canada.” For ten points, name this Frenchman who discovered the mouth of the St. Lawrence River and mapped settlements at Quebec City and Montreal.
Answer: Jacques Cartier Page 2

483. After putting forth the 21 demands of the Inter-­‐Enterprise committee, this organization argued for reforms with Wojciech Jaruzelski [voy-­‐check yah-­‐roo-­‐zel-­‐ski]. Shortly after a popular manager, Anna Walentynowicz, was fired, this organization went on strike at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk. Lech Walesa [lek vah-­‐wen-­‐sah] led, for ten points, what influential Polish labor union and political movement?
Answer: Solidarity (or Solidarnosc) BONUS: This aforementioned

484. As this man was getting off a bus in Buenos Aires, Peter Malkin and two other agents of Mossad tackled and abducted him. Hannah Arendt wrote about the “banality of evil” as displayed by this man at his 1961 trial for war crimes in Jerusalem. For ten points, name this man who hid in Argentina for a decade before being executed for his role in orchestrating the Holocaust.
Answer: (Otto) Adolf Eichmann BONUS: Eichmann’s role in the Holocaust included devising a plan to deport Jews to this island in the Southern Hemisphere. Madagascar Plan

485. This empire’s last ruler, Brihadratha, was assassinated by Pushyamitra. Megasthenes negotiated a peace agreement and marriage alliance in which this empire sent 500 elephants to the neighboring Seleucid Empire. A series of edicts in this empire were inscribed on pillars topped by lions and issued by its third ruler. For ten points, name this ancient Indian empire founded by Chandragupta and ruled by Ashoka [ah-­‐ shoke].
Answer: Mauryan Empire BONUS: Ashoka spread Buddhism in the Mauryan Empire, having converting to the faith after his bloody conquest of this kingdom in 260 BC. Kalinga Page 3

486. During these wars, the Massacre of Vassy was orchestrated by the Duke of Guise [gheez]. One army in these wars was commanded by the prince of Conde and Gaspard de Coligny [co-­‐lih-­‐nee]. The phrase “Paris is well worth a Mass” was spoken by Henry IV, who ended the last of these wars by issuing the Edict of Nantes, promising toleration. For ten points, name this set of 16th century wars between Protestant Huguenots and Catholics in a certain country.
Answer: French Wars of Religion BONUS: A major turning point during the French Wars of Religion was this

487. Margaret Keogh [kee-­‐oh] is believed to be the first civilian killed during this event, shot by forces commanded by William Lowe. One side in this event had headquarters in the General Post Office. Patrick Pearse and James Connolly were among those executed in Killingham Gaol [”jail”] for leading this event, which began with the proclamation of an independent republic. For ten points, name this 1916 uprising centered in Dublin on a certain holiday, which sought Irish independence.
Answer: Easter Rising of

488. This ruler met with Napoleon on a raft in the Neman River, where they agreed to the Treaty of Tilsit. After this man’s death, supporters of his brother started the Decembrist Revolt. Russia was brought into the Congress of Vienna by, for ten points, what tsar who was succeeded by Nicholas I after his 1825 death?
Answer: Alexander I (or Alexander Pavlovich) BONUS: The aforementioned Decembrist revolt opposed Nicholas I’s succession to the throne, instead supporting this older brother of Nicholas who secretly renounced the throne in

489. The writing of this work was prompted by Marjorie Spock’s legal actions on Long Island. Edwin Diamond, who was originally commissioned to co-­‐write this book, scathingly critiqued its author after she was hired by the New Yorker to write an article on the same subject. This book highlighted bioaccumulation as a cause of the title, bleak condition of nature. For ten points, name this landmark 1962 environmental study that argued for the ban of DDT and other pesticides, written by Rachel Carson.
Answer: Silent Spring BONUS: This major producer of DDT lobbied heavily against Silent Spring when it was first published. This developer of nylon and Teflon merged with Dow in

490. This man, who declared a price ceiling in the Edict of Maximum Prices, created a new ruling system after the Crisis of the Third Century before eventually retiring to his palace in Split to grow cabbage. The Tetrarchy was instituted by, for ten points, what Roman emperor who began the final Roman persecution of the Christians and abdicated the throne in 305 AD?
Answer: Diocletian (

491. Capital and largest city of Kenya.
Answer: Nairobi

492. Largest African lake located partially within Kenya.
Answer: Lake Victoria (

493. Nation to the west of Kenya with its longest shared land border.
Answer: Republic of Uganda

494. Pre-­‐historic hominid found in Kenya whose Latin name translates as “handy man.”
Answer: Homo Habilis

495. Along with English, this is the National language of Kenya.
Answer: Kiswahili

496. Book by Isak Dinesen, a 1985 version of which won Best Picture, about a Danish woman’s life in Kenya.
Answer: Out of Africa

497. Controversial successor to Jomo Kenyatta and president of Kenya from 1978 to 2002.
Answer: Daniel arap Moi Page 6

498. French city whose 1919 Peace Conference negotiated much of its terms.
Answer: Paris

499. US President at the time of signing.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson

500. British Prime Minister who helped negotiate it.
Answer: David Lloyd George (

501. Italian “Premier of Victory” who signed it.
Answer: Vittorio Orlando

502. Controversial clause, listed as Article 231, that allowed countries to demand German reparations.
Answer: War Guilt Clause (

503. British economist who grimly predicted the Economic Consequences of the treaty.
Answer: John Maynard Keynes ([canes], but be lenient)

504. Province given to Japan that sparked the May Fourth Movement.
Answer: Shandong

505. German name for the 1938 violation of the treaty, the annexation of Austria.
Answer: Anschluss Page 7

506. European country whose conquistadors fought the Mayans on the Yucatan Peninsula.
Answer: Spain (

507. Concept that the Mayans represented with dots and lines in a base 20 system.
Answer: numbers (

508. Type of system represented by the Mayan Long Count, which assigned slightly over 394 years to a Baktun.
Answer: Mayan calendar

509. Country home to the classical Mayan city of Tikal where modern Mayan peoples were involved in a decades-­‐long civil war.
Answer: Guatemala

510. Large Mayan city that is home to the step pyramid of El Castillo and the Temple of Kukulcan.
Answer: Chichen Itza

511. Mayan text in the Quiche [kee-­‐chay] language that tells of the mythological Hero Twins.
Answer: Popul Vuh (or Popul Wuj)

512. Mayan ruler of Palenque [pah-­‐len-­‐kay] for 68 years, known as the Great.
Answer: Pacal the Great (or K’inich Janaab Pakal I

513. Mayan city, ruled by 18 Rabbit and Smoke Imix, that was the chief rival of Quirigua.
Answer: Copan Page 8

514. Shortly after this event began, a suspension bridge to Almada, colored similarly to the Golden Gate Bridge, was re-­‐named for it. The (+) beginning of this event was signaled with a Paulo de Carvalho song from the prior year’s Eurovision Song Contest. Marcello (*) Caetano was removed from power in this event, which ended a regime began by Antonio Salazar. The Estado Novo ended with, for ten points, what peaceful 1974 Portuguese revolution?
Answer: Carnation Revolution (

515. George Podebrad contested his claim to this region’s kingdom with Hungarian King Matthias Corvinus. The House of Luxembourg ruled this kingdom under the (+) Blind King John, who died at the Battle of Crecy. In 1618, two Catholic regents were (*) defenestrated in a city in this kingdom, helping trigger the Thirty Years’ War. For ten points, name this region in the modern-­‐day Czech Republic which, because French people in the 19th century believed the Romani came from this region, names an unattached artistic lifestyle.
Answer: Kingdom of Bohemia (

516. This man’s death was indirectly caused by the publishing of Charles D. Cooper’s letters. James Callender wrote about this man’s affair with Maria [mah-­‐RYE-­‐uh] (+) Reynolds. This man, who urged consolidation of state and federal debt in his “First Report on Public Credit,” joined George (*) Washington to put down a rebellion in Pennsylvania over a whiskey tax that this man implemented. The First Bank of the United States was founded by, for ten points, what first Secretary of the Treasury who was killed in a duel with Aaron Burr?
Answer: Alexander Hamilton

517. The residents of four colonial towns in what is now this country, including Rufisque [roo-­‐feesk], were granted citizenship thanks to the efforts of Blaise Diagne [dee-­‐ahn]. The Portuguese built a slave trading outpost on (+) Goree Island in the harbor of what is now this country’s capital. An airport named for this country’s first president, Leopold Senghor, lies on the narrow Cap-­‐Vert peninsula near the (*) Pointe des Alamadies, the westernmost point of the African continent. For ten points, name this Francophone African country where Macky Sall holds office in Dakar.
Answer: Senegal

518. During this battle, J.R.R. Tolkien came down with a fever and was ruled unfit to fight. Earlier French losses at (+) Verdun left Douglas Haig in command at this battle. Nearly 20,000 British soldiers died on the first day of this battle, the bloodiest day in British military history. (*) Tanks were first used at, for ten points, what 1916 battle that failed to break the German line along a French river?
Answer: Battle of the Somme (or Somme Offensive) Page 9

519. During this event, a Writers Union commission headed by Jaroslav Seifert investigated crimes against literary figures. This event prompted a promise of intervention in the Bratislava Declaration. The Two Thousand (+) Words manifesto was issued during this period, whose end was protested by Jan Palach’s [yan pal-­‐ok’s] self-­‐immolation in Wenceslas Square. During this period, newly elected First Secretary Alexander (*) Dubcek [doobcheck] attempted to implement “Socialism with a human face.” For ten points, name this period of Czechoslovakian liberalization that was crushed by a 1968 Soviet invasion.
Answer: Prague Spring

520. Charles Pelham Villiers was the “solitary Robinson Crusoe” calling for repeal of this policy in the House of Commons. The newspaper The Economist was founded to end these (+) laws, which Prime Minister Robert Peel finally repealed during the Irish (*) Potato Famine. For ten points, name this controversial set of 19th century tariffs and high duties on the import of grains into Great Britain.
Answer: Corn Law(s)

521. Vice Admiral William McRaven organized this event, which was planned for the night of the White House Correspondents Dinner. In the aftermath of this event, the perpetrators consulted the (+) Saudi Arabian government while onboard the USS Carl Vinson before burying a corpse in the North Arabian (*) Sea. A courier named Abu Ahmed al-­‐Kuwaiti was tracked to discover the location of this event’s target, who was codenamed “Geronimo.” For ten points, name this May 2, 2011 event in which members of SEAL Team Six killed the leader of Al-­‐Qaeda.
Answer: assassination (or killing, shooting, etc.) of Osama bin Laden (

522. One leader from this dynasty scored a decisive victory against the chained-­‐up ships of his rival in the Battle of Yamen. The Manichaeist (+) White Lotus Society expanded its influence during this dynasty, eventually toppling it in the Red Lotus Rebellion. The most prominent emperor of this dynasty moved its capital from Xanadu to (*) Dadu, and failed twice in trying to conquer Japan after seeing his ships annihilated by typhoons. For ten points, name this Mongol-­‐led dynasty founded by Kublai Khan.
Answer: Yuan Dynasty (

523. The first of these wars began as a local conflict between a Sicilian tyrant and mercenaries who sought aid from North Africa. Cato the Elder called for the third of these conflicts by repeatedly demanding that an enemy city must be destroyed. For the point, name this series of ancient wars for control of the Mediterranean between Rome and Carthage.
Answer: Punic Wars (

524. A city in this US state became known as the “Cradle of Liberty” after the American Revolution. This state’s Commonwealth Health Insurance Connector is often considered to be one of the models for Obamacare and was supported by governor Mitt Romney. Charlie Baker currently leads, for the point, what state in New England where the governor does not have an official residence in Boston?
Answer: Massachu

525. Until its demise in the early 21st century, this country’s monarchy was the only one in the world in a majority Hindu country. This country is where Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary began their successful climb of the world’s highest mountain. For the point, name this Himalayan country where many climbers of Mount Everest have first set off from its capital of Kathmandu.
Answer: Nepal

526. This region was one of the leading producers of green-­‐glazed celadon during the Goryeo dynasty. A later king of this region’s Choson dynasty is credited with inventing its modern alphabet, hangul. For the point, name this peninsula, ruled in the 15th century by King Sejong.
Answer: Korean Peninsula (

527. This man founded a treatment center for poliomyelitis in Warm Springs, Georgia where he died in 1945. In one speech, this man condemned an “unprovoked and dastardly attack” and called for Congress to declare war. For the point, name this President who gave the “Day of Infamy” speech on December 8th, 1941, the day after the Pearl Harbor attack.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (or FDR

528. One of these events was the brightest observed celestial event in history and occurred in 1006 AD. Another of these events in 1054 AD was recorded by Chinese astronomers and led to the creation of the Crab nebula. For the point, name these events in which stars violently explode.
Answer: supernova (do not

529. The opening fighting of this war was the Battle of Edgehill. The New Model Army was created during this war, whose opposing sides were nicknamed the Cavaliers and the Roundheads. For the point, name this war that culminated with the execution of Charles I on the orders of Oliver Cromwell.
Answer: English Civil War

530. Wang Mang attempted to usurp this dynasty by establishing the Xin [shin] line. The Record of the Grand Historian was compiled by Sima Qian [chee-­‐ahn] during this dynasty, whose other achievements include establishing the Silk Road. For the point, name this dynasty that shares its name with China’s majority ethnic group and succeeded the Qin [chin].
Answer: Han Dynasty

531. This region was the source of the Great Heathen Army, which conquered much of England before their defeat at Edington by Alfred the Great. Rulers born in region included Canute the Great and Harald Hardrada, and men from this region sacked Lindisfarne in 793 AD. For the point, name this region, the home of Viking invaders.
Answer: Scandinavia (

532. In this city, a Christian apostle first met the tent-­‐making couple Priscilla and Aquila. A letter addressed to the residents of this city states “Love suffers long and is kind; love does not envy” and contains a phrase translated as “through a glass, darkly.” For the point, name this city, the recipient of two Pauline epistles written while Paul was in Greece.
Answer: Corinth (

533. This man’s regime replaced a general who deposed Norodom Sihanouk, Lon Nol. From Year Zero onward, this man attacked the “New People” who lived in urban areas and executed them in the “killing fields.” The Khmer Rouge was led by, for the point, what genocidal Cambodian dictator?
Answer: Pol Pot (

534. In 1912, oncologist Isaac Adler became the first physician to link this plant to one of its most infamous health results. This crop’s long history of being grown in Virginia began with John Rolfe. For the point, name this crop that was popularized in England by Sir Walter Raleigh and that can be found in cigarettes.
Answer: tobacco

535. This book ends abruptly after a character declares “if only there were no other people in the world.” The main character of this book shares a brief kiss with Peter van Daan and writes entries into a journal that she dubs “Kitty.” For the point, name this book that describes a Jewish girl’s experience hiding from the Nazis in Amsterdam.
Answer: The Diary of Anne Frank (

536. One king of this name was left to die by the Bactrian satrap Bessus and fled from the Battle of Gaugamela in his chariot; that last ruler of this name was dethroned by Alexander the Great. A “Great” ruler of this name launched a failed invasion of Greece in 490 BC. For the point, give this name shared by three Persian rulers, the first of whom lost at Marathon.
Answer: Darius (

537. Attempts to alleviate this event’s effects included the formation of an “exclusion zone” and the construction of an iron sarcophagus over the affected area. Backlash against the governmental coverup of this event led to the adoption of glasnost, or openness. For the point, name this 1986 meltdown of Reactor 4 at a facility in Pripyat, Ukraine, the world’s first Level 7 nuclear energy catastrophe.
Answer: Chernobyl disaster

538. In 2010, this company was purchased by the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital in the largest leveraged buyout in restaurant history. The predecessor of this company was prefixed with the word “Insta-­‐”, in honor of the Insta-­‐machines it was inspired to use by McDonald’s. The “imagery of something big” inspired the signature item of, for the point, what fast food chain that sells the Whopper?
Answer: Burger King (

539. This man, who attacked Lavrenti Beria for turning his predecessor into a paranoiac, shouted “we will bury you” during a meeting with Western ambassadors. This man’s namesake “thaw” included his Secret Speech denouncing the cult of personality of his predecessor. For the point, name this Soviet premier who succeeded Joseph Stalin in 1953.
Answer: Nikita Khrushchev

540. Herbert Morrison recorded live coverage of this event to be played alongside newsreel footage. In response to this event, the Graf Zeppelin II used helium to achieve its buoyancy instead of hydrogen. For the point, name this 1937 disaster in which thirty-­‐six people died when an airship burst into flame.
Answer: LZ 129 Hindenburg disaster (

541. In this city, the Nativity, Passion, and Glory Facades adorn a Gothic and Art Nouveau-­‐styled cathedral that was left unfinished by its architect, Antoni Gaudi. Legend has it that Hannibal himself founded this city, naming it after his own family. The Sagrada Familia is located in, for the point, what city that hosted the 1992 Summer Olympics and is the capital of Catalonia in Spain?
Answer: Barcelona

542. To help refugees, Fridtjof Nansen created a passport for this organization, which created the Mandate of Palestine. Japan left this organization after it invaded Manchuria in 1931, and Henry Cabot Lodge prevented the United States from joining this organization. Woodrow Wilson heavily promoted, for the point, what international organization to promote peace that was created after World War I?
Answer: League of Nations (or LN

543. The Supreme Court cases of Eichman v. U.S. and Texas v. Johnson dealt with the desecration of these objects, which is currently a protected form of free speech. Betsy Ross supposedly convinced George Washington that these objects should have five-­‐pointed, not six-­‐pointed stars. For the point, name this American symbol whose stripes represent the 13 colonies.
Answer: American flags (

544. This man was the presumptive heir to Franz Joseph, his uncle, who was the second-­‐to-­‐last Habsburg to rule in Europe. The Black Hand orchestrated this man’s death in Sarajevo. Gavrilo Princip assassinated, for the point, what archduke whose 1914 death led to an invasion of Serbia and the First World War?
Answer: Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria

545. This body of water is home to a British naval base in the Chagos Archipelago that has been suspected of having a CIA prison on Diego Garcia. This body of water was the primary site of a disaster that killed several hundred thousand people along the shores of this ocean in December 2004. For the point, name this ocean that Portuguese explorer Vasco de Gama entered after rounding the Cape of Good Hope at the southern end of Africa.
Answer: Indian Ocean

546. An alliance based on this peninsula included cities like Cora, Tusculum, and Alba Longa and signed the Treaty of Cassius with a nearby empire in 493 BC. The southern part of this peninsula was once known as Magna Graecia for its Greek colonies and was defended by Pyrrhus of Epirus. For the point, name this peninsula home to the Etruscans and other peoples conquered by the early Romans.
Answer: Italian peninsula (

547. After a group known as “Jennie May” planned this structure as part of a riverfront revitalization project, FDR authorized it in 1935 as the US’ first National Historic Site. Eero Saarinen designed this centerpiece of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial to honor Lewis and Clark. For the point, name this curved monument on the Mississippi River near St. Louis.
Answer: Gateway Arch (

548. The siege of this city was lifted by a corridor over neighboring Lake Ladoga, and was the target of Army Group North during Operation Barbarossa. This city was renamed in 1914, 1924, and 1991. For the point, name this city, a former capital of Russia that was besieged by Nazi Germany for over two years.
Answer: Leningrad (

549. This dynasty’s founder, Nurhaci created the Eight Banners Army. A century later, its Kangxi [kahng-­‐ shee] Emperor welcomed Jesuit missionaries. For the point, name this Chinese dynasty founded by Manchu invaders after the fall of the Ming.
Answer: Qing [cheeng] Dynasty (

550. This country’s Plain of Jars was significantly bombed during the 1960’s during a war fought primarily in its neighbor to the east. This country’s Hmong people have often been oppressed and its city of Luang Prabang has become a hub for tourists on a budget. For the point, name this country which, during the Vietnam War, was the primary site of the Ho Chi Minh trail through the mountains to the east of its capital, Vientiane.
Answer: Laos

551. Manco Yupanqui [yu-­‐pahn-­‐kee] founded a breakaway state of this empire in Vilcabamba five years after a civil war in this empire ended in the defeat of a half-­‐brother of Huascar, Atahualpa. The siege of Cuzco was fought by, for the point, what Peruvian empire that was conquered by the Spanish under Francisco Pizarro?
Answer: Incan Empire

552. In this city, triads populated a once-­‐walled city built in the Kowloon peninsula. This city features the I. M. Pei designed Bank of China Building in its Central district. Reclamation projects have reduced the size of Victoria Harbor in, for the point, what special administrative region that was given to China from Britain in 1997?
Answer: Hong Kong

553. According to one of this man’s former hitmen, this man was urged by his nation’s Minister of Justice to assassinate presidential candidate Luis Galan. After escaping his private prison La Catedral, this man was hunted down by the Search Bloc and died in a 1993 shootout. For the point, name this Colombian drug lord, the leader of the Medellin [meh-­‐deh-­‐LEEN] Cartel.
Answer: Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria

554. A famine of this commodity in Lancashire, England, was caused by a decrease of its American exports. This commodity names the type of diplomacy used by the Confederacy to appeal to European powers during the Civil War, and it was nicknamed “King” due to its importance to the American south. For the point, name this textile crop that is processed by an Eli Whitney-­‐invented “gin.”
Answer: cotton Page 1

555. A fascist party in this country, the Iron Guard, was suppressed by Ion Antonescu, who was executed for war crimes after World War II. The last Communist ruler of this country was, with his wife Elena, executed on live TV on Christmas Day, 1989. For the point, name this country where dictator Nicolae Ceausescu ruled from Bucharest.
Answer: Romania

556. One example of this type of performance caused a riot at its premier in Paris in 1913, called The Rite of Spring. Tchaikovsky created a popular type of this work which features characters such as the Mouse King and Clara, and is often performed in December. For the point, name this type of artistic performance, of which Swan Lake and The Nutcracker are famous example.
Answer: ballet (

557. In one conflict in this region, the 93rd Highlanders became honored as the Thin Red Line. In this region, Lord Raglan made his name launching a courageous assault upon a Russian battery during the siege of Sevastopol. The Charge of the Light Brigade took place on, for the point, what Russian peninsula in the Black Sea, the subject of an 1850s war?
Answer: Crimean Peninsula (

558. This country holds the distinction of being the only one to unwillingly gain its independence; its first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, cried on television after this country was expelled from Malaysia. For the point, name this city-­‐state on the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

559. This material names a type of cross that was the focus of a speech in 1896 by the populist American politician William Jennings Bryan. This material sparked a mass migration to the Klondike region of Canada when it was discovered there, which led to many miners freezing to death. For the point, name this precious metal which forms a prize given to winning athletes at the Olympics.
Answer: Gold

560. In what is today this modern country, Piye and Kashta were rulers of the ancient Kingdom of Kush. This country is home to the southern reaches of the ancient region of Nubia. Sulaymon Solong founded the Sultanate of Darfur in what is now, for the point, what African country whose southern territory became independent in 2011?
Answer: Sudan (

561. The father of King George III was either killed with a cricket ball or a ball used for this sport. In 1789, members of the National Assembly took an oath in a venue for this sport. Jeu de paume was a racquet-­‐less precursor to, for the point, what sport played professionally by Roger Federer and Serena Williams?
Answer: tennis (

562. This document ends with a mutual “pledge to each other” of “our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.” Earlier, this document condemned a ruler for “imposing Taxes on us without our Consent,” one of numerous “repeated injuries and usurpations” committed by the King. John Hancock affixed an oversized signature to, for the point, what founding American document that was approved on July 4, 1776?
Answer: US Declaration of Independence Page 2

563. An archaeologist from this country discovered the Mask of Agamemnon in his search for a historical Troy. A government in this country created the Entarte Kunst exhibition to “show off” the works of Die Brucke artist Ernst Kirchner. For the point, name this country, home to Heinrich Schliemann, where degenerate art was banned by the Nazi party.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland

564. This modern country’s former Northwest Frontier province was bounded by the Durand Line. Shortly after Muhammad Ali Jinnah became governor general of this nation, conflict broke out with its majority Hindu neighbor. The Jammu and Kashmir state is disputed by China, India, and, for the point, what nation governed from Islamabad?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

565. The grandson of the king, this man was named Prince of Wales after the 1756 death of his father, Frederick. This king, who authorized taxes on British colonies to pay for the Seven Years’ War, suffered in his later years from dementia and insanity. For the point, name this British king who ruled during the American Revolution, the third of his name.
Answer: George III (

566. Absolute Chakri rule ended with this country’s 1932 constitution, and its King Bhumibol ruled from 1946 to his 2016 death. This country’s military leader, Prayuth Chan-­‐ocha, has applied lese-­‐ majeste [lez ma-­‐ja-­‐stay] laws to block criticism of this country’s new king, Vajiralongkorn, styled as Rama X [tenth]. For the point, name this country where protests supporting the Shinawatra family have taken place in Bangkok.
Answer: Thailand

567. Negotiations in this location defined the modern borders of Hungary, agreed to in the Treaty of Trianon. The third building campaign in this location occurred after the Dutch War and included the creation of the Hall of Mirrors. For the point, name this palace where Louis XIV [14] of France established his court and where the primary treaty ending World War I was signed.
Answer: Versailles (

568. Approximations for this number named “Milu” were discovered by the 5th century Chinese astronomer Zu Chongzhi; one of which was 355 over 113. Archimedes used a polynomial algorithm to obtain lower and upper bounds for the value of this constant. For the point, name this constant, equal to the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter, which is roughly equal to 3.14.
Answer: pi

569. In one expedition, this man defeated Desiderius and conquered the Lombard kingdom, though he was less successful when Basque troops destroyed his rearguard in Roncevaux Pass in the Pyrenees. This son of Pepin the Short was coronated on Christmas Day by Pope Leo III. For the point, name this Frankish king who was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 800.
Answer: Charlemagne (or Charles the Great

570. Richard Allen converted a blacksmith shop into one of these buildings in the 1790s in Philadelphia. Jonathan Edwards worked at one of these buildings in Northampton. Two lanterns were hung in one of these buildings in Boston as part of Paul Revere’s Ride. Boston’s Old North and Trinity are, for the point, what type of building for Christian congregations?
Answer: churches Page 3

571. In this country, in 1863, protests against Russian conscription led to the January Uprising. After an 1846 uprising, Austria and Russia agreed to violate the Congress of Vienna by revoking the “free city” status that had been granted to this country’s city of Krakow. In the 18th century, European powers thrice partitioned, for the point, what country, the former site of the Duchy of Warsaw?
Answer: Poland

572. This man, who was Edward Braddock’s chief aide during the French and Indian War, attacked a group of unprepared Hessian soldiers on the day after Christmas. Christopher Jackson won a Tony for portraying this man in Hamilton, in which he is introduced in the song “Right Hand Man.” For the point, name this commander of the Continental Army who won the Battle of Trenton after crossing the Delaware River in 1776.
Answer: George Washington

573. Shortly before his death, this man acted as a guide and navigator for an expedition to Nantucket Sound aboard the Swan. This man harvested fish from the muddy banks of the Eel River and explained methods of fertilizing corn and beans according to an account by William Bradford. For the point, name this Patuxet Native American who lived among the Plymouth colonists and whose agricultural prowess provided food for the first Thanksgiving.
Answer: Squanto (or Tisquantum) Page 4

574. Backlash against the Treaty of Tientsin helped prompt this conflict, in which a 55-­‐day siege of the International Legations was ended by the arrival of the Eight Nation Alliance. The Empress Dowager Cixi [see-­‐shee] supported a militia group against foreign missionaries in, for the point, what Chinese rebellion led by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists?
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (

575. This river is said to be home to serpents known as “phayas,” which locals believe are responsible for the Naga fireballs that seem to rise out of this river’s water. When this river floods, low tides and flow reversals prompt it to flow into the Tonle [ton-­‐lay] Sap. For the point, name this river that drains into the South China Sea after forming most of Laos’ western border, the longest river in Southeast Asia.
Answer: Mekong River

576. The hero Trophonius named one of these places, another of which was built around an oak tree in Dodona. Gases and vapors from hot springs were used during a ritual at one of these places in which Pythia, a priestess of Apollo, would utter cryptic statements believed to predict the future. For the point, name these Greek religious sites such as Delphi.
Answer: oracles (

577. This man offered “Comfort, not condolence” to the parents of fallen soldiers, as recorded by Thucydides in a funeral oration after the first year of the Peloponnesian War. This man orchestrated the growth of the Delian League as his city’s empire, moving its treasury to the Parthenon. For the point, name this statesman of the Golden Age of Athens.
Answer: Pericles

578. This stadium’s design moved away from a retractable roof design after a roof collapsed at France’s De Gaulle airport in 2004. This stadium will be the largest venue in use for the 2022 Winter Olympics, though Herzog, Meuron and Ai Weiwei originally designed it for use in the 2008 Summer Olympics. For the point, name this Beijing stadium that resembles a fowl’s resting place.
Answer: Bird’s Nest (

579. This party lost 40 seats in a 1924 election shortly after the publication of the Zinoviev letter, which embarrassed Ramsay MacDonald. This party implemented the National Health Service and other welfare programs under the leadership of Clement Attlee, who defeated Winston Churchill in the 1945 election. For the point, name this left-­‐leaning political party in the United Kingdom.
Answer: Labour Party

580. A colonist from this country was nicknamed “Peg Leg Pete.” According to a popular legend, another colonist from this country purchased Manhattan for the equivalent of 24 dollars. Peter Minuit and Peter Stuyvesant represented, for the point, what country that controlled New York before the British?
Answer: Netherlands (

581. Muckraker Ida Tarbell wrote a lengthy history of one company in this industry, which had been founded by John Rockefeller. This industry grew quickly in the North Sea in the 1970’s a decade during which supply shocks in this industry led to economic disruptions in countries dependent on Middle Eastern sources of this commodity. For the point, name this commodity whose sources are exploited alongside natural gas deposits in the Gulf nations, such as the UAE and Saudi Arabia.
Answer: Oil or Petroleum

582. This composer of the Hunting Cantata included two viola da gambas but no violins in the sixth and final work in a collection named for a German state. This composer’s Musical Offering was based on a melody given to him by Frederick the Great. Felix Mendelssohn revived the music of, for the point, what Baroque composer of the Brandenburg Concertos?
Answer: Johann Sebastian Bach

583. Major theatres in this 20th century war included the Liaodong Peninsula, the Yellow Sea, and Mukden. Theodore Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating an end to this war in the Treaty of Portsmouth. The Baltic fleet was crushed at the Battle of Tsushima in, for the point, what war fought between a European and an Asian power in the early 20th century?
Answer: Russo-­‐Japanese War

584. The casualties in one battle of this war led James Spears to compare its machine gun fire to a hamburger machine. Hill 937 thus became known as Hamburger Hill in this war, during which Company C was commanded by William Calley during the My Lai Massacre. For the point, name this Southeast Asian war from which US forces withdrew shortly before the fall of Saigon.
Answer: Vietnam War

585. This island was the site of the first Winter Olympic Games held in Asia, which took place in 1972. Together with the neighboring Kurile Islands, this island forms the ancestral homeland of the Ainu people, whose language has been largely displaced by Japanese speakers. For the point, name this island, where fishing and skiing form major industries in and near Sapporo, the northernmost of the four main islands of Japan.
Answer: Hokkaido

586. This novel exposed the plight of “ragged school” children to wealthy Victorians by praising the generosity of Mr Fezziwig and exposing the regrets of Jacob Marley. This novel’s protagonist meets ghosts representing the present, past, and future, who inspire him to help Bob Cratchit and Tiny Tim. For the point, name this novel by Charles Dickens in which Ebenezer Scrooge discovers the true meaning of Christmas.
Answer: A Christmas Carol

587. The poet Callimachus catalogued books in this city at a facility where Ptolemy II called for a minimum of 500,000 scrolls to be held in storage. One of the Seven Wonders of the World was located on the small island of Pharos near this city. Euclid studied in, for the point, what Egyptian city, the home of a famous Lighthouse and a library that suffered several devastating fires?
Answer: Alexandria Page 2

588. Two of these objects are used to represent the muses Thalia and Melpomene [mel-­‐pom-­‐eh-­‐nee]. The heads of 2 nude women are thought to be representations of these objects from Africa in Picasso’s painting, Les Desmoiselles d’Avignon. For the point, name these objects used in ritual dance traditions in Africa and to cover the faces of ancient Greek actors.
Answer: masks

589. After Abbas III was deposed, the Afsharid Dynasty was founded in this country by Nader Shah. This country’s capital was moved to Isfahan by Abbas the Great, the fifth Shah of a dynasty that installed Twelver Shia Islam as this country’s official religion. The Safavid Dynasty ruled, for the point, what Middle Eastern country that moved its capital in 1796 to Tehran?
Answer: Iran (

590. From 1935 to 1949, this phenomenon occurred in China because English printing presses outpaced those of Chiang Kai-­‐Shek’s government. Eviction of white farmers by Robert Mugabe’s government contributed to a major instance of this phenomenon in 1990s Zimbabwe that resulted in the creation of 100-­‐billion-­‐dollar bank notes. For the point, name this phenomenon in which currency is devalued and prices rise.
Answer: (hyper)inflation

591. A route used in this industry was established by Jesse Chisholm. Railroad facilities were built for use in this industry in Abilene and Kansas City, which shipped cargo to stockyards in Chicago. The development of barbed wire ended the era of massive drives in, for the point, what industry consisting of western ranches?
Answer: cattle industry (

592. Leonhard Euler worked on, but did not solve, a problem concerning finding a Hamiltonian path for the “tour” of one of the pieces used in this game. IBM’s computer Deep Blue won a 1996 match of this game against Garry Kasparov, a Grand Master. For the point, name this strategy game played with knights, pawns, and kings.
Answer: playing chess

593. After Pyrrhus deployed this weapon against the Roman cavalry, they were forced to retreat at the Battle of Heraclea. Persian masters of these weapons were called mahouts, and they were used at the Battle of Gaugamela by Darius III, who deployed them as cavalry against Alexander the Great. Hannibal famously crossed the Alps with, for the point, what tusked war animal?
Answer: war elephants

594. This country captured parts of Pomerania and broke the power of the Hanseatic League. Its most famous ruler intervened in the Thirty Years’ War on the Protestant side until his death at the Battle of Lutzen. For the point, name this home of Gustavus Adolphus, who ruled from Stockholm.
Answer: Sweden

595. Robert Clive led this company’s forces to victory at the Battle of Plassey. This company lost control of its namesake country after the Sepoy Mutiny with the creation of the Raj. For the point, name this British company that controlled the trade of many spices throughout East Asia.
Answer: British East India Company (”British” not needed after mentioned) Page 3

596. A hero acquired one of these objects from an eight-­‐headed beast whose heads were lured into eight gates baited with eight jars of wine. A mirror, a jewel, and one of these objects named Kusanagi are the three sacred treasures of Japan. For the point, name these objects, such as the katana, that were used by samurai warriors in combat.
Answer: swords (

597. These figures were jointly granted a title by Pope Alexander VI, who also granted them land with the bull Inter caetera. The conquest of Granada was completed during the reigns of these two monarchs, who expelled their country’s Jews with the Alhambra Decree. For the point, name these two Catholic Monarchs of Spain who authorized Christopher Columbus to sail to the New World.
Answer: Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile (

598. This country’s history contains a period of history at the end of the Rurik Dynasty, where men known as False Dmitris were prominent figures in the so-­‐called Time of Troubles. Boris Godunov was another early ruler of this country, along with Michael Romanov, whose founded a dynasty in this country that lasted until 1917. For the point, name this country where tsars ruled throughout the 19th century.
Answer: Russia

599. In this US state, George Pickett’s decision to attend a fish bake led to the fall of the Five Forks railway junction. This state’s Henrico County was the site of a diversionary attack at Deep Bottom, as Ambrose Burnside attempted to detonate a mine behind enemy forces and initiate the Battle of the Crater. In this state, the capture of Petersburg was vital in forcing the surrender of the Confederacy. For the point, name this US state where the Confederate capital of Richmond was located.
Answer: Virginia Page 4

600. This city’s Gauleiter for two decades was Joseph Goebbels. A famous photo taken by Yevgeny Khaldei shows a soldier raising a Soviet flag over this city’s Reichstag. The Fuhrerbunker was constructed in, for ten points, what capital city of Nazi Germany?
Answer: Berlin

601. Traveling performers who made use of these objects in the 1920s became known as barnstormers. A wooden one of these objects nicknamed the Spruce Goose was designed by Howard Hughes. Two siblings worked in a bicycle shop to build one of these objects that they operated in Kitty Hawk in 1903. For ten points, name these vehicles that were first piloted by the Wright Brothers.
Answer: airplanes (

602. An investigation in this country revealed that many presidential speeches had been altered ahead of time by the shaman Choi Soon-­‐Sil. In 1988, this country hosted the Summer Olympics which were boycotted by their neighbor to the north. For ten points, name this country whose president Park Geun-­‐ Hye was impeached in 2017 in the midst of mass protests in Seoul.
Answer: South Korea (or the Republic of Korea; do not

603. This instrument has a cylindrical bore, unlike the cornet. This instrument is twice as long as a related instrument used to play “Taps,” the bugle. For ten points, name this highest-­‐pitched brass instrument in a standard orchestra.
Answer: trumpet

604. Pierre L’Enfant designed a plan that established the layout of this city. This city was burned by British forces during the War of 1812. For ten points, name this city where Dolley Madison saved paintings that were hung in the White House.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (or the District of Columbia)

605. This scientist worked as an assistant to Tycho Brahe [ty-­‐ko bra-­‐hee] and imperial mathematician to the Holy Roman Empire. This scientist noted that Mars sweeps out equal areas in equal times and travels in an elliptical orbit. For ten points, name this German astronomer who discovered the three laws of planetary motion.
Answer: Johannes Kepler Page 1

606. Tribonian composed a law code of this empire named for a leader who faced the Nika Riots. Basil II the Bulgar Slayer ruled this empire, which was founded by Constantine I. For ten points, name this empire, ruled by Justinian the Great from Constantinople, that fell in 1453.
Answer: Byzantine Empire (

607. A painting by Orchardson shows this man on the ship Bellerophon heading to his exile. Delaroche painted a realistic version of a scene where this man rides a donkey rather than a rearing horse across the Alps. For ten points, name this emperor of France.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

608. A dispute over the deaths of federal troops during the “Spot Resolutions” was prompted by the United States’ use of this river, not the Nueces, as a southern boundary. That territorial dispute prompted President James Polk to begin the Mexican-­‐American War. For ten points, name this river that forms the south Texan border.
Answer: Rio Grande (or Rio Bravo del Norte) BONUS: Far from what is now the US-­‐Mexico border, Texas attempted to expand east of the Rio Grande to capture what lucrative trail that connected Independence, Missouri with the capital city of New Mexico? Santa Fe Trail

609. This commander’s troops fended off a far larger besieging army in the Battle of the Trench. This man defeated a contingent representing the Quraysh merchants at the Battle of Badr, after which he consolidated his base of power in Medina. Mecca was conquered by, for ten points, what leader who performed the Hijra migration and founded Islam?
Answer: Muhammad BONUS: This man, who served as a guard during the Battle of the Trench and the Battle of Badr, is nicknamed “The Truthful” and became the first Caliph after Muhammad’s death. Abu Bakr as-­‐Siddiq

610. These shapes were defined by Apollonius as the set of points in the plane that have a fixed ratio of distances to two foci. When Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that a certain constant is transcendental, he proved it is impossible to “square” one of these shapes. Line segments between two points on them are called chords. For ten points, name these shapes that have a constant radius.
Answer: circles Page 2

611. During this man’s 1643-­‐44 voyage to find a passage to Chile south of the normal trade route, he mistook the west coast of New Zealand’s North Island as the west coast of Australia, thought the Cook Strait was a bay, and missed mainland Australia entirely. For ten points, name this Dutch explorer and namesake of an Australian island state.
Answer: Abel Tasman BONUS: While Tasman’s boats were floundering around New Zealand, one of them was attacked by a group of these indigenous people of New Zealand. Maori people

612. This city was the site of the first Olympic performance of the Jamaican bobsled team and the only appearance of Eddie “The Eagle” Edwards. This city’s Olympic Saddledome and Stampede Corral were used as venues for its 1988 Winter Olympics. For ten points, name this Canadian city whose NHL team, the Flames, competes with the Edmonton Oilers for bragging rights in Alberta.
Answer: Calgary BONUS: Canada failed to win an official gold medal in the Calgary Olympics, but did win a gold medal in this demonstration sport, which involves 40-­‐pound stones. This sport is famous for its competitors using brooms to furiously sweep the ice. Men’s and/or Women’s curling

613. After a handshake at Teano, this leader declared his loyalty to King Victor Emanuel II. This ex-­‐member of the Carbonari led his redshirts on the Expedition of the Thousand to conquer the Kingdom of Two Sicilies. For ten points, name this general who led the military campaigns that unified Italy.
Answer: Giuseppe Garibaldi BONUS: After fleeing a death sentence, Garibaldi joined the Colorados during the Ragamuffin War to liberate this country, then known as Rio Grande do Sul. Garibaldi made his home in this country’s capital, Montevideo. Oriental Republic of Uruguay

614. This war coincided with the Dada movement. John Singer Sargent painted blindfolded soldiers returning after being mustard gassed at the Battle of Ypres [eep] during this war. The author of “Dulce et decorum est,” Wilfred Owen, died in, for ten points, what war that lasted from 1914 to 1918?
Answer: World War I (

615. An important primary account of this New World empire’s mythology is named the Florentine Codex. According to a myth from this empire, a hummingbird deity guided their ancestors to an island in Lake Texcoco [tesh-­‐ko-­‐ko]. For ten points, what empire’s creation myth included Huitzilopochtli [h’weetz-­‐ee-­‐ lo-­‐POK-­‐tlee] helping to found the city of Tenochtitlan [ten-­‐oak-­‐teet-­‐lahn]?
Answer: Aztec Empire BONUS: This Aztec deity, who possesses a name meaning “feathered serpent,” retrieves the bones of mankind from the underworld and dips them in his own blood to restore the human race to life. According to popular legend, some Aztecs believed Hernan Cortez to be an incarnation of this god. Quetzalcoatl Third Quarter The categories are ...

616. Vice President under Eisenhower during both of his terms who later resigned from the presidency.
Answer: Richard Milhous Nixon

617. First Soviet satellite that launched the Space Race and led Eisenhower to create NASA.
Answer: Sputnik I

618. Complex whose “unwarranted influence” Eisenhower warned against in his farewell address.
Answer: military-­‐industrial complex (

619. Eisenhower authorized establishment of what organization that participated in the space race?
Answer: NASA (

620. Two states that were admitted to the US during the Eisenhower administration.
Answer: Alaska; Hawaii Page 4

621. Country ruled by the Plantagenets that fought France in the war.
Answer: England (do not

622. The Plantagenets were opposed by the House of Valois from what country?
Answer: France

623. French peasant girl who helped relieve Orleans and was later burned at the stake.
Answer: Joan of Arc (or Jeanne d’Arc

624. Epidemic disease that struck Europe, weakening France before the Battle of Poitiers [pwa-­‐tee-­‐ay].
Answer: Black Death (

625. Number of years the war actually lasted, within 10.
Answer: 116 (

626. Type of English soldiers who first saw success at the Battle of Crecy.
Answer: Longbowmen (or Archers) Page 5

627. Ancient English ring monument whose components each weigh more than 20 tons.
Answer: Stonehenge

628. Type of engineering project mastered by the Romans to deliver water to its cities, such as Segovia.
Answer: aqueducts

629. Copper statue standing on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, built by Gustave Eiffel.
Answer: Statue of Liberty (

630. Major European river the Romans built a bridge across to invade Dacia in modern Romania
Answer: Danube

631. Type of Mesopotamian step-­‐pyramid, a Great one of which was built in Ur.
Answer: ziggurats

632. Former church and mosque in Istanbul, designed by Isidore of Miletus, once the world’s largest cathedral.
Answer: Hagia Sophia Page 6

633. This war was allegedly prompted by the telegraphed instruction “furnish the pictures and I’ll furnish the war.” Such yellow (+) journalism by William Randolph Hearst during this war raised tensions after the sinking of the USS Maine (*). Puerto Rico and Guam were ceded to the United States following, for ten points, what 1898 war against a European power that had controlled Cuba?
Answer: Spanish-­‐American War

634. One of this man’s subordinates, Crixus, was killed along with another of this man’s allies, Oenomaus. This Thracian was finally defeated at the Battle of (+) Siler River, and after his death, many of his followers were crucified along the (*) Appian Way. For ten points, name this former gladiator who led a slave revolt against the Roman Republic.
Answer: Spartacus

635. This man allied France to Sweden via the Treaty of Barwalde in the Thirty Years’ War, countering Hapsburg power. This man, who defeated the Duke of (+) Buckingham in the 1627 siege of La Rochelle, was targeted by Marie de Medici in the Day of the (*) Dupes. For ten points, name this “Red Eminence,” an anti-­‐Huguenot clergyman and chief minister to King Louis XIII [13th] who was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu (or Armand Jean du Plessis)

636. One Prime Minister of this country agreed to Roy McMurtry, Roy Romanow, and Jean Chretien’s so-­‐called “Kitchen Accord.” (+) Other leaders of this country have included Brian Mulroney and Kim Campbell, while (*) Alberta is a relatively politically conservative part of this country. For ten points, name this country led by a two-­‐time Liberal Prime Minister named Pierre Trudeau, who was the father of its current leader, Justin Trudeau.
Answer: Canada

637. Architects created this city’s “Seven Sister” skyscrapers under the direction of Boris Iofan, who also designed a neoclassical palace that would have been built over the demolished Cathedral of Christ the (+) Saviour. An architect working in this city was blinded so he could never design anything as beautiful as his work on St. (*) Basil’s Cathedral. In the 20th century, tanks commemorated the October Revolution with parades in Red Square in, for ten points, what capital of Russia?
Answer: Moscow Page 7

638. This man was treated for a broken leg by Samuel Mudd before dying in a shootout with federal troops on a farm in northern Virginia. This man’s reputation as an (+) actor allowed him to sneak into a theatrical performance where he jumped onto the stage and shouted “Sic Semper Tyrannis” at the audience in (*) Ford’s Theater after shooting a U.S. president. For ten points, name this assassin of Abraham Lincoln.
Answer: John Wilkes Booth

639. This historical event provides the backdrop of Hermann Hesse’s novel Narcissus and Goldmund. Seven women (+) and three men share a hundred stories with each other while fleeing this event in (*) Florence in Giovanni Boccaccio’s Decameron. Early treatments of the Danse Macabre motif depict the ravages of, for ten points, what Medieval epidemic?
Answer: Black Death (

640. This country’s capital was the site of the 13th of May race riots in 1969. Chin Peng led a communist insurgency during this country’s namesake (+) Emergency. Najib Razak is the Prime Minister of this country, where the Yang di-­‐Pertuan Agong is an elected (*) monarch who serves as head of state. For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country where the Petronas Towers stand in Kuala Lumpur.
Answer: Malaysia

641. This agreement’s namesake peace process ended after a visit by Ariel Sharon to the Temple Mount caused the Second Intifada. Yitzhak Rabin and (+) Yasser Arafat were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize a year after signing the first part of this agreement, which began with mutual recognition between the (*) PLO and the government of Israel. For ten points, name this 1990s-­‐era peace agreement that began with secret negotiations in the Norwegian capital, for which it is named.
Answer: Oslo Accords BONUS: The

642. After the Battle of the Allia, one of these structures was built and named for Servius Tullius. That structure of this type was surpassed by the Aurelian line, built in the 3rd century AD. For ten points, name this type of defensive structure that was built by the Qin Dynasty to guard the northern border of China.
Answer: walls (

643. A Walter Isaacson biography of this man inspired a 2015 film in which Seth Rogen plays a colleague of this man, Steve Wozniak. After this man was kicked off the Lisa project, he led the Macintosh project until resigning from the company he co-­‐founded in 1976. For ten points, name this business icon and longtime CEO of Apple.
Answer: Steve Jobs

644. In 1976, George H.W. Bush took over a leadership role in this organization for slightly less than a year. This agency trained a group of exiles called Brigade 2506, which was decisively defeated after an amphibious landing at the Bay of Pigs. For ten points, name this American organization, based in Langley, Virginia, that manages international espionage.
Answer: Central Intelligence Agency (or CIA)

645. The Ditchley Portrait shows Queen Elizabeth wearing an outfit of this color. A rose of this color was used to symbolize the House of York, as opposed to the red rose used by the House of Lancaster. For ten points, name this color of the chalk-­‐laden Cliffs of Dover.
Answer: white (

646. When categorizing these constructs in the English language, the place and manner of articulation are typically both given. These constructs differ from a similar construct in that they require a complete or partial closure of the vocal tract. For ten points, name these linguistic constructs that are often contrasted with vowels.
Answer: consonants Page 1

647. Description acceptable. The first person known to propose this theory was Aristarchus of Samos. This theory, which argued in opposition to the Ptolemaic [toh-­‐le-­‐may-­‐ik] model, was promoted in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, a book that led to Galileo’s house arrest. For ten points, name this astronomical theory proposed by Copernicus as a replacement for geocentrism.
Answer: heliocentrism (

648. William Lloyd Garrison burned a copy of the US Constitution because it failed to support this cause, which he advocated for in The Liberator. William Wilberforce fought for this cause in the UK, and it was made law throughout the British Empire in 1833. For ten points, name this cause that was achieved via the 13th Amendment and the Emancipation Proclamation.
Answer: abolition of slavery (

649. The Jewel Voice Broadcast was delivered by the holder of this position. Between the 9th and 12th centuries, holders of this position frequently married women of the Fujiwara clan. In 1946, the holder of this position renounced his divine descent from the sun goddess Amaterasu. For ten points, name this position held by Hirohito during World War II.
Answer: Emperor of Japan (

650. Natives who worked near this location were put on the silver roll as opposed to the gold roll, which was reserved for Americans and Europeans. The Torrijos-­‐Carter Treaties specified a twenty year time frame for this location to pass from American control to that of a Central American country. For ten points, name this waterway, opened in 1914, that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal (

651. Sima Yan established the Jin dynasty during this period by overthrowing the Cao Cao-­‐founded Wei. The collapse of the Han dynasty led to this strife-­‐filled period of Chinese history. For ten points, what is this period named for the number of major combatants?
Answer: Three Kingdoms period BONUS: The tumult of the Three Kingdoms period essentially started in 184 AD with this peasant revolt, led by Zhang Jiao. What is this revolt whose name includes both a color and a piece of headwear? Yellow Turban Rebellion Page 3

652. This man, who removed Andrei Gromyko as foreign minister, began a policy of nonintervention known as the Sinatra Doctrine. The Gang of Eight targeted this man in a coup that was thwarted by a speech given atop a tank by Boris Yeltsin. The reforming policy of glasnost was championed by, for ten points, what final leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev BONUS: The aforementioned Sinatra Doctrine applied to the USSR’s allies within this defensive pact, a rival to NATO during the Cold War. Warsaw Pact (

653. An early example of these structures consisted of six mastabas stacked upon each other; that building was built by Djoser and designed by the architect Imhotep. Examples of these structures commissioned by Menkaure, Khafre, and Khufu are found near the Sphinx. For ten points, identify these ancient Egyptian tombs.
Answer: Egyptian pyramids BONUS: The Great Pyramids and the Sphinx are found on the outskirts of modern Cairo in this city. Giza

654. This military force was dismantled at Scapa Flow on Ludwig von Reuter’s orders, hoping that it would not be divided up between the victors after the Armistice. Alfred von Tirpitz revolutionized, for ten points, what military force that included the High Seas Fleet and which brought the US into World War I by sinking the Lusitania?
Answer: Imperial German Navy (

655. During this war, the duc de Tallard’s attempt to capture Vienna was defeated at the Battle of Blenheim [blen-­‐em]. The Duke of Marlborough and Eugene of Savoy commanded the winning alliance in this war against Louis XIV’s army. For ten points, name this conflict that ended when Philip V was recognized as king of a certain Iberian country.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession BONUS: After the War of the Spanish Succession, the Duke of Ormonde was accused of treason for his alleged support of this

656. The need to extract this metal led Bartholeme de Medina to design the patio process, which uses mercury for that purpose, much like the Washoe process. The Bolivian mines at Potosi produced this commodity, which were minted as Spanish pieces of eight. Bimetallism in the United States called for the use of, for the point, what metal that is less precious than gold?
Answer: Silver BONUS: A negative connotation is attached to silver for some as a result of the Biblical tale of whose betrayal of Jesus for “thirty pieces of silver”? Judas Iscariot Third Quarter The categories are ...

657. FBI stands for the Federal Bureau of what?
Answer: Investigation

658. Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were executed for giving American secrets to what country?
Answer: Soviet Union (

659. J. Robert Oppenheimer was the head of a nuclear weapons project named for what New York City borough?
Answer: Manhattan

660. The Stasi was a repressive secret police agency in what European country?
Answer: East Germany (

661. American pilot Francis Gary Powers was flying what kind of spy plane when he was shot down over the USSR?
Answer: U-­‐2 (

662. City where spies crossed a national border at Checkpoint Charlie.
Answer: Berlin Page 5

663. “Virgin Queen” of England who died in 1603, ending the House of Tudor.
Answer: Elizabeth I (

664. Type of disaster that destroyed St. Paul’s Cathedral and thousands of houses in London in 1666.
Answer: Great Fire of London

665. Architect who re-­‐designed St. Paul’s and dozens of other churches after that disaster.
Answer: Sir Christopher Wren

666. Playwright who died in the early part of the century after retiring to Stratford upon Avon.
Answer: William Shakespeare

667. Religious group that, according to Titus Oates, supposedly planned the Popish Plot to assassinate the king in 1678.
Answer: Roman Catholics (

668. King of England overthrown by William and Mary in the 1688 Glorious Revolution.
Answer: James II of England (

669. Country with capital Ankara that was borne out of the fallen empire.
Answer: Turkey

670. Secular founder of that country who fought in World War I.
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

671. Country that gained its independence from the Ottomans in 1832 after fighting in Athens.
Answer: Greece

672. Elite Ottoman infantrymen who were kidnapped as young boys and forcibly converted to Islam.
Answer: janissary

673. Ethnic group subjected to a genocide by the Ottomans during World War I.
Answer: Armenians

674. Russian tsar who fought the Pruth River Campaign against the Ottomans.
Answer: Peter the Great (

675. During this event, negotiations were mediated by U Thant, and Adlai Stevenson famously agitated for an answer from Valerian Zorin. This event was ended with the removal of (+) Jupiter weapon systems from Turkey, and it led to the creation of the Moscow-­‐Washington hotline (*). For ten points, name this 1962 crisis in which the Soviet Union attempted to place weapons on a Caribbean island.
Answer: Cuban Missile Crisis (

676. To reduce ethnic conflicts in this country, its law mandates that its president must be a Sunni Muslim and its prime minister must be a (+) Maronite Christian. This country was invaded in 2006 after Hassan Nasrallah organized numerous cross-­‐border ambushes against (*) Israeli villages. For ten points, name this country where Hezbollah is based in Beirut.
Answer: Lebanon

677. In a legend from this country, a woman who tries to ride her newlywed husband’s horse is thrown off and bounces on her skirt all the way to the moon. Slue-­‐Foot (+) Sue rode a catfish down a river in this country, and a man in this country dies after beating a steam powered hammer in a steel-­‐driving contest. (*) Pecos Bill and John Henry are two characters from the folklore of, for ten points, what country where Paul Bunyan’s birth supposedly occurred in Wisconsin or Minnesota?
Answer: United

678. This Dublin-­‐born soldier and statesman routed Auguste Marmont at Salamanca, a key battle of the Peninsular War, and was made British (+) Prime Minister in 1828. In 1815, this commander’s forces were joined by Gebhard von Blucher’s Prussian troops near (*) Brussels in his most crucial victory. For ten points, name this British general who defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo.
Answer: Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (

679. This city was the final home of a composer who depicted the mistress of Nero in The Coronation of Poppea. Claudio Monteverdi worked in this city, where the (+) Ospedale della Pieta employed the “Red Priest” who composed The Four Seasons. (*) Antonio Vivaldi lived in, for ten points, what Italian city where opera was staged during Carnival and the barcarole was sung by gondoliers rowing along its canals?
Answer: Venice Page 8

680. Two of these figures, Mushka and Pchyolka, were purposely killed in 1960 to prevent foreign powers from inspecting their (+) vehicle. The most famous of these figures was locked in a box for weeks of training and died of overheating after a separation failure, having completed four (*) orbits aboard Sputnik 2. Laika was one of, for ten points, what animals that the Soviets trained to be cosmonauts?
Answer: Soviet space dogs (

681. The first female ruler of an Asian nation, Queen Anula, ruled the Anuradhapura kingdom in what is now this country. (+) The Pali Canon, an ancient Buddhist scripture, was recorded in this country after being composed in northern India. (*) Kandy was the last independent kingdom in this modern country, which is connected to the mainland by Adam’s Bridge. For ten points, name this island country, known as Ceylon during its British occupation, found off the coast of India.
Answer: Sri Lanka

682. On the day that this man said “Let us have faith that right makes might” in the Cooper Union speech, he was photographed at (+) Mathew Brady’s studio in New York. The Piccirilli brothers carved a sculpture of this man that had been designed by Daniel Chester French; that sculpture is the focus of a memorial at the west end of a reflecting pool on the (*) National Mall. For ten points, name this American president whose memorial building in Washington, DC features inscriptions of the Gettysburg Address.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln

683. This route was first trekked by the crew of the Tonquin and Wilson Price Hunt, who would go on to establish Fort Astoria here. This route branched off to Montana via the (+) Bozeman route and to Utah via the Mormon trail. One wagon route went as far as Fort (*) Hall on this trail, which eventually stretched past the Cascade Mountains into the Willamette Valley. For ten points, name this 19th century trail that connected Missouri to the Pacific Northwest.
Answer: Oregon Trail BONUS: The House of Wisdom, an Islamic Golden Age-­‐era center of learning, was built by Harun al-­‐Rashid in what city, the capital of modern Iraq? Baghdad Page 9

684. This government was founded after its leader won the Battle of Sekigahara against the Toyotomi clan. This government’s policy of sakoku came to an end when Matthew Perry’s Black Ships forced the opening of Japan through the 1854 Convention of Kanagawa. For ten points, name this last Japanese shogunate.
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu)

685. A war named for these people was won by Hamilcar Barca and led to his conquest of Spain. Famed soldiers of this type include slingers from Rhodes and archers from Crete. Greeks who fought for Persia were, for ten points, what type of soldier that fought not for national pride, but for money?
Answer: mercenary (

686. The Dartmouth, the Eleanor, and the Beaver carried this commodity from England to the American colonies. The Intolerable Acts were passed in response to the dumping of this commodity into a Massachusetts Harbor in 1773 by members of the Sons of Liberty. For ten points, identify this commodity destroyed in a namesake Boston party.
Answer: tea (

687. This location is the setting of a photo of a boy holding a toy hand grenade by Diane Arbus. Belvedere Castle and the Strawberry Fields memorial to John Lennon are located in this park, which was outlined in the Greensward Plan by Calvert Vaux [voh] and Frederick Law Olmsted. For ten points, what is this large park whose name indicates its position in the middle of Manhattan?
Answer: Central Park (

688. This city was one of first sites for rubber to be grown outside of South America, as part of a botanical research project at Kew. This city’s Crystal Palace stood in its Hyde Park until 1936 and was opened in 1851 by Queen Victoria. Sewage was once pumped into the River Thames in, for ten points, what capital city of England?
Answer: London

689. Charles Colson admitted this man had told him that a typewriter was fabricated in the Alger Hiss case. This politician sabotaged peace talks in Vietnam in the aforementioned Chennault affair, promising better results after this man defeated Hubert Humphrey in the 1968 election. For ten points, name this US President who withdrew the US from Vietnam in 1973.
Answer: Richard Nixon Page 1

690. Twelve “captains and defenders of liberty” were elected to write this city’s laws when it was briefly reorganized into the Golden Ambrosian Republic following the fall of the Visconti family. After that republic fell, this city was ruled by the Sforzas. For ten points, name this capital of Lombardy, a city in Northern Italy.
Answer: Milan

691. Oliver Cromwell ended a policy whereby these people had been banned from England since the reign of Edward I. The Balfour Declaration pledged support for the creation of a homeland for these people in the Middle East. For ten points, name this religious group whose British members have included Benjamin Disraeli.
Answer: Jewish people Page 2

692. A novel set in this country takes its name from the dying reaction of Boabdil and is titled The Moor’s Last Sigh. A group of telepathic youths hold a conference in this country in a novel in which Saleem Sinai was born at the exact moment of this country’s independence. For ten points, name this setting of Salman Rushdie’s novel Midnight’s Children.
Answer: India BONUS: Rabindranath Tagore was an Indian poet who wrote in which language spoken by over 100 million people in Eastern India and Bangladesh? Bengali

693. Brocken Peak in this country’s Harz Mountains is said to be the site of witches’ meetings on Walpurgisnacht. An annual festival in the Theresienwiese originally celebrated a wedding, but today mostly celebrates this country’s consumption of bratwurst and beer. For ten points, name this country where Oktoberfest celebrations are the world’s largest annual festival.
Answer: Germany BONUS: Carnival has long been celebrated throughout Germany as well, but particularly so in which predominantly Catholic city, the largest in North Rhine Westphalia? This city’s name is the same as a type of fragrance which is produced here. Cologne

694. This country’s Kalenjin people came to power and discriminated against its Kikuyu ethnic group. This country’s Westgate shopping mall was attacked in 2013 by Al-­‐Shabaab, a terrorist group based in neighboring Somalia. For ten points, name this east African country led by Uhuru Kenyatta.
Answer: Kenya BONUS: Dedan Kimathi led the Kikuyu people in a

695. Every autumn in this city, the krypteia were permitted to slaughter slaves to prevent events like the Messenian Wars and other helot uprisings. This city’s agoge [uh-­‐goh-­‐gay] system trained boys from the age of 7 into this city’s elite military. For ten points, name this ancient Greek city-­‐state whose army fought Athens in the Peloponnesian War.
Answer: Sparta (or Lacedaemonia) BONUS: Menelaus was a mythical king of Sparta who was married to which woman? Her abduction led to a conflict depicted in the Iliad. Page 3

696. This title was promised to Henry V at the Treaty of Troyes and was split from the Kingdom of Navarre by Joan II. The next holder of this position was known as the dauphin. After 987, holders of this position were descended from Hugh Capet. For ten points, name this royal title held by eighteen different men with regnal name Louis.
Answer: King of France (

697. Demilitarization along this border was planned by the Rush-­‐Bagot Treaty. Lumberjack infighting along this border led to the Aroostook War, which was ended by a treaty negotiated by Daniel Webster. This border was initially demarcated by the 1783 Treaty of Paris following the American Revolution. For ten points, name this border whose eastern end lies between Maine and New Brunswick.
Answer: the border between Canada and the United

698. A symphony written during this war contains a passage parodying a Franz Lehar tune over a snare drum in its depiction of soldiers invading the title city. That Symphony No. 7 in C Major is dedicated to the 500 thousand citizens who died in that 900 day siege during this war. For ten points, name this war in which Dmitry Shostakovich wrote his Seventh Symphony, depicting the siege of Leningrad by Nazi Germany.
Answer: World War II BONUS: Another musical composition inspired by World War II was a dissonant Krzysztof Penderecki [chris-­‐toff pen-­‐der-­‐etz-­‐kee] piece for 52 strings entitled Threnody to the Victims of what city? Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima

699. John Logie Baird pioneered the mechanical type of this device, which was improved upon by devices using image dissector tubes. Philo Farnsworth invented the electric version of this device, which contained cathode ray tubes that use superimposed red, green, and blue to display color. For ten points, name this device whose early version featured black and white broadcasts by NBC and CBS.
Answer: Television (or TV) Page 4

700. Country whose Weimar Republic ultimately fell during the Depression.
Answer: Germany

701. New York street that was the center of the Stock Market crash.
Answer: Wall Street

702. Set of programs begun by Franklin Roosevelt in an attempt to offset the effects of the Great Depression.
Answer: New Deal

703. Standard that every major world currency left during the Great Depression?
Answer: Gold

704. English king who insisted on the formation of the coalition “National government” in 1931.
Answer: George V Page 5

705. Was assassinated in 44 BC after proclaiming himself dictator four years earlier.
Answer: Gaius Julius Caesar (

706. Became the first emperor of Rome.
Answer: Augustus Caesar (or Octavian

707. Wrote the Stoic work Meditations and was the last of the Five Good Emperors.
Answer: Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus

708. Allied with Cassius at the Battle of Philippi, where he was defeated by the Second Triumvirate?
Answer: Marcus Junius Brutus

709. Defeated the Mediterranean pirates before joining the First Triumvirate.
Answer: Pompey the Great (or Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus)

710. Died invading Parthia at the Battle of Carrhae and was known as the richest man in Rome.
Answer: Marcus Licinius Crassus Page 6

711. River that nourished ancient Egyptian culture and is divided into “white” and “blue” portions.
Answer: Nile River

712. Species of dung beetle worshipped by the ancient Egyptians.
Answer: scarab (

713. Pharaoh who died at the age of 18 and whose tomb was discovered in 1922 by Howard Carter.
Answer: King Tutankhamun (

714. Egyptian symbol of “life,” resembling a cross with a handle, that is carried in depictions of almost every Egyptian pharaoh.
Answer: ankh

715. Royal necropolis opposite Thebes, a major burial site that contains 63 discovered tombs of pharaohs and Egyptian nobles.
Answer: Valley of the Kings (

716. Pharaoh who established a sun-­‐worshipping cult in the 14th century BC.
Answer: Akhenaten (or Amenhotep IV

717. In 2015, members of this group noted “It. Just. Isn’t. That. Good.” in their two-­‐star review of In the Aeroplane Over the Sea by Neutral Milk Hotel. That review was labeled “Disgusting” by a website that later praised a US State Department effort to counter this group: a world map with the US (+) shrunk to be too small for this group to find. In real life, a member of this group used the caption “We respawn in Jannah” in an (*) Instagram post referencing Call of Duty, one of its numerous recruitment attempts over social media. Clickhole.com frequently lampoons, for ten points, what terrorist group that lost control of Mosul in July 2017?
Answer: ISIS (or Islamic

718. One of these people is the subject of Robert Browning’s poem Sordello. William IX, Duke of Aquitaine is often called the first of these people, whose primary output consisted of (+) cansos and sirventes and who often used the Occitan language to tell (*) stories about chivalrous themes. For ten points, name these medieval European poets who wrote songs of courtly love.
Answer: troubadours (

719. This region’s ports of Dyea and Skagway boomed in the 1890s as through points for (+) gold prospectors. Sitka was the Russian territorial capital of this region, which was acquired by (*) the U.S. in 1867 in a move dubbed Seward’s Folly. For ten points, name this modern US state home to the cities of Fairbanks and Anchorage.
Answer: Alaska

720. This leader advocated for a mobile professional force in The Army of the Future, panning his nation’s usage of the (+) Maginot Line. After Philippe Petain took power as the head of the (*) Vichy puppet state, this man led his country’s “Free” forces against the Nazis during World War II. For ten points, name this first president of the French Fifth Republic.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

721. Claude Levi-­‐Strauss’s Triste Tropiques [treest troh-­‐PEEK] focuses primarily on this non-­‐Asian country, which recently surpassed New Guinea in having the most (+) uncontacted peoples within its borders. After declaring independence in 1822, an empire was established that lasted until an 1889 coup overthrew Dom Pedro II. Shantytowns called “favelas” dot the urban landscape of cities like (*) Sao Paolo and Rio de Janeiro in, for ten points, what Portuguese-­‐speaking South American country?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil Page 8

722. This island is home to a distinctive type of pottery known as the “kamares ware,” examples of which are on display in (+) Heraklion. The Thera volcanic eruption may have ended a civilization on this island, where frescos depicting a (*) bull-­‐leaping motif are common at the palace of Knossos. For ten points, name this largest Greek island, the center of the Minoan civilization.
Answer: Crete

723. This action was compared to “climb[ing] the highest mountain,” “fly[ing] the Atlantic,” in a 1962 (+) speech that noted “we choose to” do this “in this decade.” The development of the (*) Saturn V [five] propulsion system was instrumental in performing this action, which was last done by the Challenger lander in 1972. For ten points, name this exploration first done by Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong aboard Apollo 11.
Answer: going to the Moon (

724. After natives in what is now this country committed a ritual mass suicide known as puputan, the city of Klungkung fell to European colonists. A ruler of this country established a system called USDEK to implement Guided Democracy; that system fell apart after the (+) 30 September Movement and gave way to the New Order. Mohammad Hatta served as Vice President and Prime Minister for the (*) INP in, for ten points, what Asian country, once led by Sukarno and Suharto, whose capital is Jakarta?
Answer: Republic of Indonesia

725. This legislator’s first speech was to support the Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act 1960 as the representative of Finchley. This leader instituted a Community (+) Charge and was subject to a terrorist attack at a Brighton hotel. This leader resigned in favor of John (*) Major after an unpopular poll tax, which allowed the Conservatives to win the 1992 general election. For ten points, name this Conservative prime minister who defeated Argentina in the Falklands War and was nicknamed the “Iron Lady.”
Answer: Margaret Thatcher BONUS: British fishermen were killed in the Dogger Bank incident when what country’s navy accidentally fired on them, thinking they were Japanese? Russia (do not

726. This composer quoted “Der Landesvater” and the drinking song “Gaudeamus Igitur” in a piece written to celebrate an honorary doctorate from the University of Breslau. Hans von Bulow called this man’s first symphony “Beethoven’s Tenth.” The Academic Festival Overture was written by, for ten points, what German composer whose Wiegenlied [vee-­‐gen-­‐leed] is known as his “Lullaby?”
Answer: Johannes Brahms

727. Smedley Butler claimed that a conspiracy advocating this political ideology launched the Business Plot. The Silver Legion espoused this political ideology, sympathy for which was partially responsible for the cancellation of Father Coughlin’s radio show. For ten points, name this nationalist ideology held by American sympathizers of Germany and Italy in 1940.
Answer: fascism (

728. Millions of people journeyed to this location in February 2013 as part of a Kumbh Mela pilgrimage whose final destination was in Allahabad. Waters in this location are said to have purifying powers because they have touched Vishnu’s feet. For ten points, name this sacred river of Hinduism.
Answer: Ganges River (

729. This structure was derided as a “gigantic black smokestack” in a petition by the “Artists Protest,” which attempted to stop its construction. Maurice Koechlin and Emile Nouguier helped design this structure, found on the Champ de Mars, for the World’s Fair of 1889. For ten points, name this iconic wrought iron tower in Paris.
Answer: Eiffel Tower

730. Description acceptable. The construction of this location at Mount Li was described by Sima Qian [chee-­‐ ahn], who noted that streams of mercury flowed through it in an attempt to recreate the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers. This location was first discovered by workers digging a well in Xiyang [shee-­‐yahng]. To serve their master in the afterlife, thousands of terracotta warriors were placed in, for ten points, what resting place of the first emperor of unified China?
Answer: The Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor (

731. This program gained support after a report by Herbert Hoover deemed it was infeasible to turn one nation into a “pastoral state” without the migration of 25 million people. Greece and Turkey received the first part of a disbursement of 13 billion dollars under this program. For ten points, what was this American foreign policy to help rebuild postwar Europe, named for the US Secretary of State?
Answer: Marshall Plan (

732. One medieval philosopher from this country developed a “law of parsimony” that seeks to solve problems by working with the hypothesis with the fewest assumptions. That “razor” was developed by William of Ockham. For ten points, name this home country of Roger Bacon where medieval scholars studied at the University of Oxford.
Answer: England (or Great Britain or United Kingdom)

733. An opera titled for a person in this profession includes scenes entitled “Train,” “Bed,” and “Spaceship,” as well as interludes known as “knee plays” over the course of its five-­‐hour run time. A John Adams opera set at Los Alamos depicts people in this profession. For ten points, what profession is depicted in the operas Doctor Atomic and Philip Glass’s Einstein on the Beach?
Answer: scientists (

734. In May 2015, this country became the first to pass a referendum legalizing same-­‐sex marriage, and it is considering another referendum to repeal the abortion-­‐forbidding Article 9 of its constitution. Leo Varadkar’s elevation as leader of this country made him the first biracial leader of a European country, and the first LGBT person to hold the title of Taoiseach [tee-­‐shuck]. For ten points, name this country where Varadkar leads Fine Gael [finn-­‐neh GALE], the rival party to Fianna Fail [fee-­‐uh-­‐nuh FOIL] and Sinn Fein [shin FAYN] in Dublin.
Answer: Republic of Ireland (do not

735. In one speech, this man was accused of turning ministers into marionnettes by Vladimir Purishkevich, who soon agreed to aid Prince Felix Yusupov in putting this man to death. This man rose to power after providing medical guidance to Alexandra Feodorovna [fay-­‐oh-­‐dor-­‐ohv-­‐na], but this man was eventually poisoned, beaten, shot, and then drowned by nobles who believed he had undue influence over the Romanov family. For ten points, name this Russian mystic and advisor to Nicholas II.
Answer: Grigori Rasputin BONUS: Rasputin’s medical advice concerned the hemophilia suffered by this son of Alexandra and Nicholas II. This brother of Olga, Tatiana, Maria, and Anastasia died in the

736. One general’s inaction while in this state led to the Conway Cabal plot, which aimed to replace him with Horatio Gates. This state also served as Washington’s winter quarters for the Continental Army from 1777 to 1778 at Valley Forge. For ten points, what state was the location of the signing of the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia?
Answer: Pennsylvania BONUS: What important Washington, D.C. edifice is located at

737. The Din-­‐i-­‐Ilahi syncretic religion, founded by this ruler, replaced Islam as the state religion. This son of Humayun defeated the Hindu king Hemu at the Second Battle of Panipat. For ten points, name this third Mughal emperor, the grandson of Babur.
Answer: Akbar the Great BONUS: Akbar’s policies of religious toleration included a temporary end to this tax, which was levied on non-­‐Muslims. Later Mughal rulers resumed this tax. jizya tax

738. The god Mithras is often portrayed sacrificing one of these animals in reliefs, such as one in Vienna’s Kunsthistoriches Museum. In Hindu myth, Shiva’s mount is one of these animals named Nandi. Scenes from frescos found at the Palace of Knossos depict youths jumping over the horns of, for ten points, what bovine animal represented by the constellation Taurus?
Answer: bulls (

739. This man, who split his territory between his children in the Donations of Alexandria, was the third and final husband of Fulvia. In 31 BC, this man fled from the Battle of Actium after the retreat of his lover, Cleopatra. For ten points, name this protegé of Julius Caesar who lost a civil war to Octavian.
Answer: Mark Antony (or Marcus Antonius) BONUS: In the aforementioned Donations of Alexandria, Marc Antony gave control of Egypt to Cleopatra and this man, a son of Cleopatra and Julius Caesar, who ultimately served as the last pharaoh of Egypt. Caesarion (

740. Architectural projects undertaken during this dynasty included the Porcelain Tower of Nanjing and the fortification of the Great Wall of China. During this dynasty, the Muslim eunuch Zheng He led massive voyages throughout the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty preceded by the Mongol Yuan and succeeded by the Manchu Qing.
Answer: Ming Dynasty BONUS: The Ming Dynasty was founded by this man, a peasant who led forces against the Yuan in the Red Turban Rebellion and established the capital at Nanjing. Hongwu Emperor (or Zhu Yuanzhang)

741. This character woos his future wife in English, but she returns his affections in her native French tongue. This character, who announces “Once more unto the breach, dear friends” at the siege of Harfleur, urges “We few, we happy few, we band of brothers” into battle in a fourth act speech. For ten points, name this Shakespearean character, an English king who marries Catherine of Valois after winning at Agincourt.
Answer: Henry V (

742. Largest city by population in Australia just north of the first colony at Botany Bay.
Answer: Sydney

743. Capital of Western Australia from which a non-­‐stop route to London was recently launched.
Answer: Perth

744. Prime Minister of Australia since 2015.
Answer: Malcolm Turnbull

745. Second largest city in Australia, which hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics.
Answer: Melbourne

746. Nationality of Willem Janszoon, the first European to site Australia.
Answer: Dutch (

747. Australian state once called Van Diemen’s Land.
Answer: Tasmania Page 6

748. The main government complex in Moscow, as well as a type of fortress in general.
Answer: Kremlin

749. The faction that split from the Mensheviks in the Russian Revolution, from the Russian for “majority.”
Answer: Bolsheviks

750. “Restructuring,” that paired with “glasnost” as a means of reform in the late Soviet Union.
Answer: perestroika

751. A Soviet prison labor camp, derived from an acronym for the system.
Answer: gulag

752. A former newspaper of the Communist Party whose name translates to “Truth.”
Answer: Pravda

753. The loyal police force of Ivan the Terrible, who killed thousands in Novgorod.
Answer: Oprichniki (

754. Holy city that Israel claims as its capital, recognized by Donald Trump in 2017.
Answer: Jerusalem

755. Financial capital of Israel, the city where most countries maintain their embassies.
Answer: Tel Aviv

756. Empire that governed Israel as the province of Judea.
Answer: Roman Empire (or Rome)

757. Unicameral legislative body of Israel.
Answer: Knes

758. Prime Minister of Israel since 2009.
Answer: Benjamin Netanyahu

759. Organizer of the IDF who served as the first Prime Minister of Israel.
Answer: David Ben-­‐Gurion Page 8

760. In this modern day country, a lost battle on the river Adda at Lodi [loh-­‐dee] helped ensure that the First Coalition would have to accept the creation of the (+) Ligurian Republic. Another battle in this modern day country, the Battle of Marengo, began when a commander led his troops atop a donkey through the (*) St. Bernard Pass. For ten points, name this modern-­‐day country where Napoleon crossed the Alps to score a victory near Piedmont.
Answer: Italy

761. A government began resettling this group to the manmade island of Thengar Char in January 2017, much to the dismay of (+) human rights groups. The United Nations said it was “very likely” that crimes against humanity were taking place against these people, who primarily live in (*) Rakhine State, north of the Bay of Bengal. Aung San Suu Kyi [chee] has been heavily criticized for her silence on the persecution of, for ten points, what Muslim ethnic group that primarily lives in Burma?
Answer: Rohingya people (

762. Sequels to this Nineteenth Century novel include Twenty Years After and The Vicomte of Bragelonne. A central plot point of this novel is the recovery of a group of diamond studs that Queen (+) Anne is asked to wear to a royal party. In this novel, Milady de Winter acts as an agent of (*) Cardinal Richelieu and vengefully poisons the woman who falls in love with D’Artagnan [dar-­‐tan-­‐ yan]. For ten points, identify this Alexandre Dumas novel named after a trio of French soldiers.
Answer: The Three Musketeers (or Les Trois Mousquetaires)

763. A leader of this country gained controversy for nationalizing the copper industry and later committed suicide in La Moneda Palace after a successful (+) coup against him. Another ruler of this country, with CIA backing, brutally suppressed political dissent in Operation (*) Condor. For ten points, name this South American country once ruled by Salvador Allende and Augusto Pinochet.
Answer: Republic of Chile

764. This figure’s literary rights were bequeathed to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which he helped establish. This man signed a 1939 letter written by Leo (+) Szilard [zee-­‐lard] that was sent to President Roosevelt, warning him of the threat of (*) German nuclear bombs. For ten points, name this physicist who won a Nobel Prize for his work on the photoelectric effect and who also developed the theory of special relativity.
Answer: Albert Einstein Page 9

765. During this war, signs reading “pazi,” meaning “watch out,” were put up in “Sniper Alley.” Ratko (+) Mladic [m’lah-­‐ditch] was convicted of crimes against humanity for his command during the Srebrenica [sreh-­‐breh-­‐neet-­‐zah] Massacre during this war, which was ended by the (*) Dayton Agreement in 1995. For ten points, name this war during the breakup of Yugoslavia that included the Siege of Sarajevo.
Answer: Bosnian War (

766. The Genoese admiral Andrea Doria fought in this battle after a defeat at the Battle of Preveza. Six powerful galleasses were provided by (+) Venice to this battle’s winning side, which was commanded by Don John, the brother of the Holy Roman Emperor (*) Philip II. For ten points, name this decisive 1571 naval victory for a Christian alliance, stopping the Ottoman advance into the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Battle of Lepanto

767. To celebrate President Obama’s 2008 election, this city re-­‐named part of its Delmar Boulevard for him. The first Olympic Games held in the U.S. occurred in this city concurrent with its hosting of the 1904 World’s Fair. (+) In 1985, this city’s baseball team, the Cardinals played its in-­‐state rivals, the Kansas City Royals in the World Series. (*) A Charles Lindbergh plane was called the spirit of, for ten points, what major city in eastern Missouri?
Answer: St. Louis

768. This man’s failed proposal to Ella German may have led him to move to the United States. Edwin Walker was possibly attacked by this man, who mail-­‐ordered a Carcano (+) rifle under the name A. Hidell. This man was interviewed by Richard Snyder after he renounced his citizenship and defected to the Soviet Union. John (*) Connally was seriously wounded by this man, who shot him from the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository. For ten points, name this disgraced Marine who, on November 22, 1963, assassinated John F. Kennedy.
Answer: Lee Harvey Oswald BONUS: What European micro

769. This event was fueled by a speech noting that demonstrations “should not be prepared or organized” but “are not to be hampered” and was triggered after Herschel Grynszpan assassinated diplomat Ernst vom Rath. SA Brownshirts carried out, for ten points, what massive attack on the night of November 9, 1938 against Jewish stores and synagogues in Germany?
Answer: Kristallnacht (or the Night of Broken Glass)

770. This complex is the site of a bas-­‐relief showing Vasuki being pulled by 92 asuras and 88 devas in the “Churning of the Sea of Milk.” This complex was built to resemble Mount Meru and dedicated to Vishnu as a Hindu temple by Suryavarman II, but was later transformed into a Buddhist temple. For ten points, name this Khmer temple complex in Cambodia.
Answer: Angkor Wat

771. This country, which faced the 1918 Aster Revolution, was the site of a very short-­‐lived Soviet Republic led by Bela Kun. During World War II, Miklos Horthy was a regent of this European country. For ten points, what country was ruled by the medieval Arpad dynasty and, until World War I, part of a dual monarchy with Austria?
Answer: Kingdom of Hungary (

772. A revolutionary and future Prime Minister and President of this nation called for its independence in his “Motion of Destiny” speech. In this nation, the Akosombo dam was built on the Volta River while that man, Kwame Nkrumah, was President. The British colony of Gold Coast controlled what is now, for ten points, what West African country governed from Accra?
Answer: Ghana

773. The bottom-­‐central panel of a Van Eyck work shows one of these animals circled by angels and bleeding into a goblet, known as the Adoration of a Mystic one of these animals. This animal symbolizes Jesus’ sacrifice in the Ghent Altarpiece’s depiction of the Agnus Dei. For ten points, name this herd animal that is often shown in artistic depictions of the Good Shepherd.
Answer: lambs (or sheep

774. This ruler launched a campaign in response to Roman refusal to honor the will of Prasutagus. The eventual arrival of Suetonius led to this ruler’s defeat at Watling Street near Londinium. The Nero-­‐era revolt of the Iceni was led by, for ten points, what queen who fought the Romans over control of Britain in AD 60?
Answer: Boudica Page 1

775. A so-­‐called “country” in this US state, centered around the Atchafalaya River and the city of Lafayette, was settled by French speakers. Those people were removed from present-­‐day Nova Scotia in the Great Expulsion. Cajuns settled in, for ten points, what state that contains the Mississippi River Delta and was the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans?
Answer: Louisiana

776. This man proposed a new holiday, Restoration of Sovereignty Day, first celebrated in 2013. This leader planned an increase in the consumption tax as part of the Three Arrows, his signature economic plan. This leader rules in partnership with the Komeito Party and succeeded Junichiro Koizumi in his current post. For ten points name this current prime minister of Japan.
Answer: Shinzo Abe ([ah-­‐bay], but be lenient) Second Quarter

777. Though this ruler signed the Treaty of Amasya to end an inconclusive war with the Safavid Empire, he was more successful in forcing the Knights Hospitaller out of Rhodes to gain control of the Mediterranean. This ruler was victorious at the Battle of Mohacs [moh-­‐hotch] over Louis II of Hungary while expanding into Europe. For ten points, name this longest reigning Ottoman sultan, known as “the Magnificent.”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I) BONUS: Suleiman’s campaigns were aided by this red bearded Ottoman admiral, who was victorious at the Battle of Preveza against the Holy League but lost Tunis to Charles V. This man shares his name with the codename of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union. Hayreddin Barbarossa

778. This author was a close friend and travel companion of Elizabeth Campbell, the Duchess of Argyll. This author, who painted an unflattering portrait of Aaron Burr in The Minister’s Wooing, also wrote a novel in which Eva St. Clair urges those around her to convert to Christianity and Simon Legree orders one of his slaves to be beaten to death. For ten points, name this author of Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
Answer: Harriet Beecher Stowe BONUS: During her last years, Stowe lived in Hartford, Connecticut, next door to this author of works such as A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court and The Prince and the Pauper. Mark Twain (

779. One of this man’s failed investments led to Jim and Susan McDougal being investigated by independent counsel Kenneth Starr. Proceedings in a lawsuit filed by Paula Jones against this man were cited in charges of perjury and obstruction of justice brought before the Senate in 1999. For ten points, name this politician whose sexual misconduct led to the second Presidential impeachment trial in history.
Answer: William Jefferson “Bill” Clinton (

780. The Oran Massacre began in this country on its independence day, and was used as justification by Jean Bastien-­‐Thiry to attempt the assassination of Charles de Gaulle. Ahmed Ben Bella led the FLN in this country, which signed the Evian Accords to gain independence. For ten points, name this former French colony in North Africa.
Answer: Algeria BONUS: Which other North African country has made plans to build Africa’s first high speed train lines to connect cities such as Marrakesh and Casablanca? Morocco

781. One composer from this country used time signatures like 5/2 and 2/1 [five-­‐two and two-­‐one] for an overture based on the Obhikod liturgical chants. Cesar Cui joined him and three other composers from this country in the “Mighty Handful,” a group of five composers that celebrated this country’s music. For ten points, name this country where Pictures at an Exhibition was composed by Modest Mussorgsky and edited by Nikolai Rimsky-­‐Korsakov.
Answer: Russia (do not

782. A severe jaw deformation was present among many members of this family, a genetic defect caused by numerous inter-­‐marriages. The 1713 Pragmatic Sanction was created by this family, whose members included Philip II and Maria Theresa. For ten points, name this European house, originally from Austria, that once ruled Spain and the Holy Roman Empire.
Answer: House of Habsburg (or House of Hapsburg

783. Description acceptable. Descartes [day-­‐kart] posited that “clear and distinct ideas” must be true because of this idea. Teleological arguments for this idea include the watchmaker analogy. Saint Anselm of Canterbury first laid out the ontological argument for this position, which is often debated against by invoking the problem of evil. For ten points, name this philosophical position that is rejected by atheists.
Answer: the existence of God (

784. In 2010, Thomas Hagan was formally paroled for his murder of this man, who gave the “Ballot or the Bullet” speech in 1964. This man took the name name Detroit Red as a criminal; while imprisoned for robbery, he adopted the teachings of Elijah Muhammad. For ten points, name this civil rights activist and member of Nation of Islam who replaced his given surname Little with a single letter.
Answer: Malcolm X (

785. Fascist generalissimo who won the war.
Answer: Francisco Franco

786. Basque town whose 1937 bombing was depicted by Pablo Picasso.
Answer: Guernica

787. Capital of Spain which finally fell to the fascists, ending the war.
Answer: Madrid

788. Former country whose communist government sent Russian speaking advisors to help the Republican forces.
Answer: Soviet Union or USSR

789. The German name for Germany’s air force, which aided the fascist side.
Answer: Luftwaffe

790. 19th century US President who was the namesake for an International Brigade that fought in the war.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln (Brigade) Page 5

791. Country north of England that gave Edward I his nickname and whose army was later led by William Wallace.
Answer: Scotland

792. English king who fathered Edward VI with Jane Seymour, one of his six wives.
Answer: Henry VIII [8]

793. London church where Edward II knighted over 200 men in the Feast of the Swans, and where all English monarchs have been crowned since 1066.
Answer: Westminster Abbey (

794. Modern ruling house of England whose first monarch was Edward VII.
Answer: House of Windsor (

795. English prince who won at Crecy and Poitiers [pwa-­‐tee-­‐ay] during the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Edward the Black Prince (or Edward of Woodstock)

796. King who imprisoned princes Edward V and Richard of Shrewsbury in the Tower of London in 1483.
Answer: Richard III Page 6

797. German capital city where an 1884 conference attempted to organize the Scramble.
Answer: Berlin Conference

798. German chancellor who proposed that 1884 conference.
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

799. South African empire that fought the battles of Rorke’s Drift, Ulundi, and Isandlwana against the British.
Answer: Zulu Empire (

800. Modern African country that defeated Italy at Adowa to win its independence.
Answer: Ethiopia

801. US protectorate country on the Atlantic coast that remained independent during the Scramble.
Answer: Liberia

802. Iberian country whose “Pink Map” proposed a linking of its African colonies.
Answer: Portugal Page 7

803. The Boulevards of the Marshals is located in this city, which is divided into Rive Gauche [reev gohsh] and Rive Droite [reev dwot] regions. General von Choltitz refused orders from (+) Hitler to destroy this city. Leon Gambetta escaped this city via hot air balloon during an 1870 siege. Revolutionaries in this city seized weapons from (*) Les Invalides before storming the Bastille during the French Revolution. The Arc de Triomphe was built in, for the point, what city on the River Seine in France?
Answer: Paris

804. This country’s capital means red hero in its primary language, and a southern offshoot of the Trans-­‐Siberian Railroad was built through this country. This country was allied with the Soviet Union (+) during the Cold War, and served as a buffer state between it and China. For ten points, name this least densely populated country in the world which overthrew its communist regime in Ulan Bator at the end of the Cold War.
Answer: Mongolia

805. A letter denouncing this meeting noted that the country was “offered a choice between war and shame. She has chosen shame and will get war.” (+) Edvard Benes resigned over this meeting, which resulted in the First Vienna Award. This meeting was proclaimed to have secured (*) “peace for our time” by Neville Chamberlain. For ten points, name this 1938 meeting in which the Allies appeased Germany by allowing Hitler to annex the Sudetenland.
Answer: Munich Conference

806. This country was led by Siad Barre during the Ogaden War. In the early 20th century, the “Mad Mullah” founded a Dervish state in what is now this country, near where the (+) Majeerteen sultanates had earlier ruled from Puntland. In 1993, when the US invaded this country’s capital to fight Mohamed Farah Aidid, two (*) Black Hawk helicopters were shot down. For ten points, name this country on the Horn of Africa where the Battle of Mogadishu took place.
Answer: Somalia

807. When Arthur Bonifas and Mark Barrett were killed in one of these regions in Korea, US forces responded with Operation (+) Paul Bunyan, the heavily supported cutting of a poplar tree that was supposedly planted by Kim Il-­‐Sung. (*) Panmunjom and a Joint Security Area are located in one of these areas along the 38th Parallel between North and South Korea. For ten points, give this term for buffer territory between hostile countries where military personnel are banned.
Answer: Demilitarized Zone (

808. The losing side in this war lost the port city of Weihaiwei after most of the Beiyang Fleet was devastated at the Battle of the (+) Yalu Rvier. The Triple Intervention by France, Germany and Russia ensured that the Liaodong Peninsula was not claimed by the winners of this war in its ending Treaty of (*) Shimonoseki. For ten points, name this late 19th century war mostly fought in Korea, a victory for the Meiji Emperor over the Qing Empire.
Answer: First Sino-­‐Japanese War (

809. This man asserted he was the rightful ruler of his country in a letter to Pope John XXII [22], the Declaration of Arbroath. This king was (+) excommunicated after murdering John Comyn at the church of the Greyfriars. This man besieged Stirling Castle, forcing the Battle of (*) Bannockburn. For ten points, name this victorious king of the First War of Scottish Independence.
Answer: Robert I (

810. This ruler’s mother placed a nail in his helmet, believing it to be a nail from the crucifixion. This ruler and his mother, Helena, are revered as “Equal to the Apostles” in the Eastern (+) Orthodox Church. This ruler, who had his son Crispus and his wife Fausta executed in 326, believed he received a divine (*) sign before his victory at the Battle of Milvian Bridge. The Council of Nicaea was convened by, for ten points, what Roman emperor who promoted religious toleration with the Edict of Milan and converted the empire to Christianity?
Answer: Constantine the Great (or Constantine I) BONUS: Mahatma Gandhi’s

811. Early theories on this quantity were developed by Lazare Carnot [la-­‐zarr car-­‐noh], whose namesake cycle conserves this quantity. Ludwig Boltzmann’s tombstone has an equation for this quantity engraved on it. According to the second law of thermodynamics, this quantity always increases within isolated systems. For ten points, name this measure of disorder within a system.
Answer: entropy (

812. This ruler sent Agricola to govern Britain and extend Roman rule into Caledonia. This ruler was campaigning in Jerusalem when he learned of Vitellius’ ambitions to become emperor, prompting this man to return to Rome and end the Year of the Four Emperors. For ten points, name this man who founded the Flavian dynasty after the death of Nero.
Answer: Vespasian (or Titus Flavius Caesar Vespasianus Augustus, but do not

813. This show displayed the caption “SORRY GIRLS, HE’S MARRIED” on February 9, 1964. Charles Laughton filled in as host of this show on the first night that this show featured Elvis Presley, although this show’s cameramen zoomed in to avoid broadcasting Elvis’s provocative dancing. For ten points, name this CBS show that ran until 1971 and which drew over 70 million viewers for its first broadcast of The Beatles.
Answer: The Ed Sullivan Show

814. The establishment of these sites forced nearby inhabitants into lands called reductions, where they would continue to live when these sites were divided into the rancho system. Defended by royal forts called presidios, 21 of these sites were linked by El Camino Real [ree-­‐all]. Junipero Serra supervised conversion efforts at, for ten points, what Spanish religious outposts in California?
Answer: Spanish missions in California

815. In this country, Yahya Khan launched Operation Searchlight to suppress the independence-­‐seeking Awami League. This country was known at the time as East Pakistan. For ten points, name this country that, after gaining its independence from Pakistan in 1971, established its capital at Dhaka.
Answer: Bangladesh (

816. This composer’s music for a film about Ivan the Terrible was suppressed by Stalin. This composer of Lieutenant Kije [kee-­‐zhay] wrote a piece for narrator and orchestra in which the title boy’s grandfather is played by a bassoon and in which a canine swallows a duck whole. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of Peter and the Wolf.
Answer: Sergei Prokofiev Page 1

817. An injury this man suffered at the Battle of Calvi left him blind in one eye; years later, this man claimed he didn’t see a signal to retreat after raising his telescope to that eye. A 169 foot tall Corinthian column in central London commemorates this man’s most famous battle, in which he was killed aboard the Victory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.
Answer: Horatio (Lord) Nelson

818. This man confused the Lachine [la-­‐sheen] Rapids as the Northwest Passage to China. This explorer was the first to describe the land that Iroquois inhabitants lived in as “Canada.” For ten points, name this Frenchman who discovered the mouth of the St. Lawrence River and mapped settlements at Quebec City and Montreal.
Answer: Jacques Cartier Page 2

819. After putting forth the 21 demands of the Inter-­‐Enterprise committee, this organization argued for reforms with Wojciech Jaruzelski [voy-­‐check yah-­‐roo-­‐zel-­‐ski]. Shortly after a popular manager, Anna Walentynowicz, was fired, this organization went on strike at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk. Lech Walesa [lek vah-­‐wen-­‐sah] led, for ten points, what influential Polish labor union and political movement?
Answer: Solidarity (or Solidarnosc) BONUS: This aforementioned

820. As this man was getting off a bus in Buenos Aires, Peter Malkin and two other agents of Mossad tackled and abducted him. Hannah Arendt wrote about the “banality of evil” as displayed by this man at his 1961 trial for war crimes in Jerusalem. For ten points, name this man who hid in Argentina for a decade before being executed for his role in orchestrating the Holocaust.
Answer: (Otto) Adolf Eichmann BONUS: Eichmann’s role in the Holocaust included devising a plan to deport Jews to this island in the Southern Hemisphere. Madagascar Plan

821. Megasthenes negotiated a peace agreement and marriage alliance in which this empire sent 500 elephants to the neighboring Seleucid Empire. A series of edicts in this empire were inscribed on pillars topped by lions and issued by its third ruler. For ten points, name this ancient Indian empire founded by Chandragupta and ruled by Ashoka [ah-­‐shoke].
Answer: Mauryan Empire BONUS: Ashoka spread Buddhism in the Mauryan Empire, having converting to the faith after his bloody conquest of this kingdom in 260 BC. Kalinga

822. One army in these wars was commanded by the prince of Conde and Gaspard de Coligny [co-­‐lih-­‐nee]. The phrase “Paris is well worth a Mass” was spoken by Henry IV, who ended the last of these wars by issuing the Edict of Nantes, promising toleration. For ten points, name this set of 16th century wars between Protestant Huguenots and Catholics in a certain country.
Answer: French Wars of Religion Page 3

823. This man, who declared a price ceiling in the Edict of Maximum Prices, created a new ruling system after the Crisis of the Third Century before eventually retiring to his palace in Split to grow cabbage. The Tetrarchy was instituted by, for ten points, what Roman emperor who began the final Roman persecution of the Christians and abdicated the throne in 305 AD?
Answer: Diocletian (

824. This ruler met with Napoleon on a raft in the Neman River, where they agreed to the Treaty of Tilsit. After this man’s death, supporters of his brother started the Decembrist Revolt. Russia was brought into the Congress of Vienna by, for ten points, what tsar who was succeeded by Nicholas I after his 1825 death?
Answer: Alexander I (or Alexander Pavlovich) BONUS: The aforementioned Decembrist revolt opposed Nicholas I’s succession to the throne, instead supporting this older brother of Nicholas who secretly renounced the throne in

825. One side in this event had headquarters in the General Post Office. Patrick Pearse and James Connolly were among those executed in Killingham Gaol [”jail”] for leading this event, which began with the proclamation of an independent republic. For ten points, name this 1916 uprising centered in Dublin on a certain holiday, which sought Irish independence.
Answer: Easter Rising of

826. Edwin Diamond, who was originally commissioned to co-­‐write this book, scathingly critiqued its author after she was hired by the New Yorker to write an article on the same subject. This book highlighted bioaccumulation as a cause of the title, bleak condition of nature. For ten points, name this landmark 1962 environmental study that argued for the ban of DDT and other pesticides, written by Rachel Carson.
Answer: Silent Spring BONUS: This major producer of DDT lobbied heavily against Silent Spring when it was first published. This developer of nylon and Teflon merged with Dow in

827. Capital and largest city of Kenya.
Answer: Nairobi

828. Largest African lake located partially within Kenya.
Answer: Lake Victoria (

829. Nation to the west of Kenya with its longest shared land border.
Answer: Republic of Uganda

830. Pre-­‐historic hominid found in Kenya whose Latin name translates as “handy man.”
Answer: Homo Habilis

831. Along with English, this is the National language of Kenya.
Answer: Kiswahili

832. French city whose 1919 Peace Conference negotiated much of its terms.
Answer: Paris

833. US President at the time of signing.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson

834. British Prime Minister who helped negotiate it.
Answer: David Lloyd George (

835. Italian “Premier of Victory” who signed it.
Answer: Vittorio Orlando

836. Controversial clause, listed as Article 231, that allowed countries to demand German reparations.
Answer: War Guilt Clause (

837. British economist who grimly predicted the Economic Consequences of the treaty.
Answer: John Maynard Keynes ([canes], but be lenient) Page 7

838. European country whose conquistadors fought the Mayans on the Yucatan Peninsula.
Answer: Spain (

839. Concept that the Mayans represented with dots and lines in a base 20 system.
Answer: numbers (

840. Type of system represented by the Mayan Long Count, which assigned slightly over 394 years to a Baktun.
Answer: Mayan calendar

841. Country home to the classical Mayan city of Tikal where modern Mayan peoples were involved in a decades-­‐long civil war.
Answer: Guatemala

842. Large Mayan city that is home to the step pyramid of El Castillo and the Temple of Kukulcan.
Answer: Chichen Itza

843. Mayan text in the Quiche [kee-­‐chay] language that tells of the mythological Hero Twins.
Answer: Popul Vuh (or Popul Wuj) Page 8

844. Shortly after this event began, a suspension bridge to Almada, colored similarly to the Golden Gate Bridge, was re-­‐named for it. The beginning of this event was signaled with a Paulo de (+) Carvalho song from the prior year’s Eurovision Song Contest. Marcello Caetano was removed from power in this event, which ended a regime began by (*) Antonio Salazar. The Estado Novo ended with, for ten points, what peaceful 1974 Portuguese revolution?
Answer: Carnation Revolution (

845. During this battle, J.R.R. Tolkien came down with a fever and was ruled unfit to fight. Earlier French losses at (+) Verdun left Douglas Haig in command at this battle. Nearly 20,000 British soldiers died on the first day of this battle, the bloodiest day in British military history. (*) Tanks were first used at, for ten points, what 1916 battle that failed to break the German line along a French river?
Answer: Battle of the Somme (or Somme Offensive)

846. George Podebrad contested his claim to this region’s kingdom with Hungarian King Matthias Corvinus. The House of Luxembourg ruled this kingdom under the (+) Blind King John, who died at the Battle of Crecy. In 1618, two Catholic regents were (*) defenestrated in a city in this kingdom, helping trigger the Thirty Years’ War. For ten points, name this region in the modern-­‐day Czech Republic which, because French people in the 19th century believed the Romani came from this region, names an unattached artistic lifestyle.
Answer: Kingdom of Bohemia (

847. In the harbor of what is now this country’s capital, the Portuguese built a slave trading outpost on Goree Island. An airport named for this country’s first president, Leopold (+) Senghor, lies on the narrow Cap-­‐Vert peninsula near the Pointe des Alamadies, the westernmost (*) point of the African continent. For ten points, name this Francophone African country where Macky Sall holds office in Dakar.
Answer: Senegal

848. Charles Pelham Villiers was the “solitary Robinson Crusoe” calling for repeal of this policy in the House of Commons. The newspaper The Economist was founded to end these (+) laws, which Prime Minister Robert Peel finally repealed during the Irish (*) Potato Famine. For ten points, name this controversial set of 19th century tariffs and high duties on the import of grains into Great Britain.
Answer: Corn Law(s) Page 9

849. The Two Thousand Words manifesto was issued during this period, whose end was protested by Jan (+) Palach’s [yan pal-­‐ok’s] self-­‐immolation in Wenceslas Square. During this period, newly elected First Secretary Alexander (*) Dubcek [doobcheck] attempted to implement “Socialism with a human face.” For ten points, name this period of Czechoslovakian liberalization that was crushed by a 1968 Soviet invasion.
Answer: Prague Spring

850. Vice Admiral William McRaven organized this event, which was planned for the night of the White House Correspondents Dinner. In the aftermath of this event, the perpetrators consulted the (+) Saudi Arabian government while onboard the USS Carl Vinson before burying a corpse in the North Arabian (*) Sea. A courier named Abu Ahmed al-­‐Kuwaiti was tracked to discover the location of this event’s target, who was codenamed “Geronimo.” For ten points, name this May 2, 2011 event in which members of SEAL Team Six killed the leader of Al-­‐Qaeda.
Answer: assassination (or killing, shooting, etc.) of Osama bin Laden (

851. A socialist candidate for this position created the EPIC [e-­‐p-­‐i-­‐c] campaign. That man was Upton Sinclair. When Gray Davis held this position, he effectively ended the controversial Proposition 187, which banned illegal immigrants from using state services. Jerry Brown, the current holder of this position, succeeded the star of the Terminator movies, Arnold Schwarzenegger. For ten point, name this political position based in Sacramento.
Answer: Governor of California (

852. One leader from this dynasty scored a decisive victory against the chained-­‐up ships of his rival in the Battle of Yamen. The Manichaeist (+) White Lotus Society expanded its influence during this dynasty, eventually toppling it in the Red Lotus Rebellion. The most prominent emperor of this dynasty moved its capital from Xanadu to (*) Dadu, and failed twice in trying to conquer Japan after seeing his ships annihilated by typhoons. For ten points, name this Mongol-­‐led dynasty founded by Kublai Khan.
Answer: Yuan Dynasty (

853. Prior In this war, a group of German mercenaries under French leadership called Lauzun’s Legion saw action at White Plains. A German officer in this war ordered the establishment of separate toilets and kitchens and educated troops about marching orders during a brutal winter encampment. A group of Hessian soldiers in this war were defeated in a surprise attack the day after Christmas in the Battle of Trenton. For ten points, name this war in which Baron von Steuben drilled troops at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, during the winter of 1777.
Answer: American Revolutionary War (or American Revolution

854. A ruler of this city has a dream in which he sees a statue with a gold head, a bronze belly, and clay feet. A Biblical figure partially named for this city is described as sitting on top of a scarlet beast with seven heads and ten horns. The Book of Ezekiel was composed while Ezekiel was in this city, which names a whore encountered in the Book of Revelation. The Book of Daniel tells of Nebuchadnezzar II, the ruler of, for ten points, what city where the Jews were held in a namesake period of captivity?
Answer: Babylon (

855. This modern day country obtained de facto independence from the Holy Roman Empire after the Swabian War. France obtained Burgundy shortly after Charles the Bold died fighting a force primarily from this country at the Battle of Nancy. German Landsknechts imitated pike and halberd-­‐wielding mercenaries from this country, whose neutrality was affirmed during the Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this Alpine country with capital at Bern that remained neutral in both world wars.
Answer: Switzerland (

856. This composer likely hired horn players from Bohemia for the premiere of a piece whose first suite, in F major, includes an “Adagio e staccato” movement. This composer included “La Paix” [la pay] in a suite for wind band written to celebrate the Treaty of Aix-­‐La-­‐Chapelle, and he included hornpipes in a piece written for a concert for King George I held on a barge on the Thames. For ten points, name this German-­‐born English composer of Music for the Royal Fireworks and Water Music.
Answer: George Friedrich Handel

857. A man with this surname designed his country's first postage stamp and helped drive the last spike into the Canada Pacific Railway. The inventor of time zones, Sandford, had this surname, which he shares with a biologist whose most famous discovery was tested by Howard Florey's clinical trials; that man with this surname noticed inhibitory behavior in a dish of staphylococci bacteria. For ten points, what surname is shared by the discoverer of penicillin, Alexander?
Answer: Fleming (

858. This thinker’s concept of the “efficient cause” in the natural world was continued by his successor, Theophrastus. A graded scale of perfection established by this man to classify living organisms is known as his “Great Chain of Being.” This philosopher, who was exiled by Eurymedon the Hierophant, was accused by Hagnothemis of poisoning his most famous pupil, Alexander the Great. For ten points, name this Ancient Greek founder of the Lyceum and student of Plato.
Answer: Aristotle Page 1

859. Edouard de Laboulaye proposed this structure as an international effort. After this structure was completed on Bedloe’s Island, it was celebrated with its city’s first ticker-­‐tape parade. This monument’s base features an Emma Lazarus poem with the verses “give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses” called “The New Colossus.” For ten points, name this Frederic Bartholdi-­‐designed sculpture that bears a copper torch in New York Harbor.
Answer: Statue of Liberty (or Liberty Enlightening the World

860. One leader in these conflicts saw a vision of three suns before his victory at Mortimer’s Cross. For switching sides in these conflicts, Richard Neville, the Earl of Warwick, was known as the Kingmaker. These conflicts ended when Richard III was defeated by Henry VII at Bosworth, ushering in the Tudor dynasty. For ten points, name these conflicts between the rival English houses of Lancaster and York, named for their respective red and white flower badges.
Answer: Wars of the Roses Second Quarter

861. Many perpetrators of this event were tried in Gacaca courts due to a backlog in the traditional justice system. The large number of refugees fleeing this event led to the Great Lakes Crisis in a neighboring country. This event was hastened by rebel forces taking Gisenyi two weeks after the Interahamwe militia lost the capital city of Kigali. Paul Kagame [kuh-­‐GAH-­‐may] became Vice President after the end of, for ten points, what 1994 event in which the Hutus massacred their Tutsi countrymen in a central African country?
Answer: Rwandan Genocide (

862. This man refused a promotion to a desk job by saying “every poor fellow in the trenches must do his duty.” Donald Cunnel is credited with inflicting a serious head wound on this man, who attempted to kill Wilfred May but was stopped by Arthur Brown. Propaganda about this man stated the British would automatically award a Victoria Cross to anyone that could kill him. The Flying Circus was led by, for ten points, what World War I German aviator commonly known by a colorful noble title?
Answer: Manfred (Albrecht Freiherr) von Richthofen (

863. Ronald Ridenhour exposed this event in a damning letter to Congress, while Seymour Hersh was the first reporter to break this story. Ernest Medina was told to kill everything "walking, crawling, or growling" during this event, which was mitigated by interventions from Hugh Thompson's helicopter crew. This war crime was carried out by Charlie Company in the hamlets surrounding Son My [son mee]. For ten points, name this 1968 massacre carried out by the US Army during the Vietnam War.
Answer: My Lai [mee lee] massacre (

864. This battle was preceded by a gift of sports balls to remind the winning king that he should stick to tennis. The fall of Harfleur prompted the losing side to fight this battle. At this battle, the order to kill all prisoners was given after Henry V feared that his baggage train would be overrun. This battle’s losing side could not use cavalry thanks to stakes placed in muddy ground; instead the winning side’s longbowmen fired at will. For ten points, name this 1415 battle fought on St. Crispin’s Day, a victory for England in the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt BONUS: The English longbow also played a big role in this 1346 battle, where it prevailed over Genoese crossbows. Shortly after this battle, Calais [cah-­‐lay] fell to England. Battle of Crecy

865. A 1915 law was passed just to grant this specific status to Kojo Houénou [ko-­‐jo hoo-­‐ay-­‐noo] and Ouanilo Béhanzin [wah-­‐nee-­‐lo beh-­‐han-­‐zin]. Women who married foreigners were not allowed to retain this status until 1973. The Constitution of 1791 distinguished between active and passive forms of this status. This status was extended to Algerian Jews in the Crémieux [creh-­‐m'yew] Decree. For ten points, name this status that can be acquired "by spilled blood" by soldiers wounded in the Foreign Legion, who can then vote in certain European elections.
Answer: French citizenship Bonus: Many soldiers who obtained citizenship through the spilled blood provision fought in which section of the French armed forces, whose name signifies its openness to soldiers from other countries? French Foreign Legion Page 3

866. In an unfinished story from this collection, Canace finds a falcon who was abandoned by her lover and then shows a romantic interest in her brother, who is also Genghis Khan’s son. In this collection’s first story, Palamon and Arcite fight in a massive battle to win Emily’s hand in marraige. Characters in this work include the Squire and his father, the Knight, who tell stories during their pilgrimage to the shrine of Thomas Becket. For ten points, name this story collection by Geoffrey Chaucer.
Answer: The Canterbury Tales BONUS: Geoffrey Chaucer wrote The Canterbury Tales in this language, which was in use from approximately the Norman conquest of Britain through the 16th century. Middle English (

867. This battle’s Operation Griffin included a violation of the Hague Convention when Otto Skorzeny dressed his troops in enemy uniforms. During this battle, American troops were fired on after surrendering at Malmedy. Anthony McAuliffe led a spirited defense of the town of Bastogne in this battle, whose losing side tried to use tanks to recreate the 1941 invasion of France. For ten points, name this 1944 battle that made a namesake shape in Allied lines.
Answer: Battle of the Bulge (

868. After this dynasty's Emperor Taiding died, it suffered the War of the Two Capitals. This dynasty, which gained power after winning the Battle of Yamen, built its capital at Dadu. The Red Turban Revolt, which included the future Hongwu emperor, successfully overthrew this dynasty. The founder of this dynasty had previously won the Toluid Civil War after Mongke Khan died. Marco Polo recorded visiting, for the point, what Mongol Chinese dynasty that preceded the Ming?
Answer: Yuan Dynasty BONUS: The 1279 Battle of Yamen was decisive in ending this dynasty's rule of China. (Southern) Song Dynasty Third Quarter The categories are ...

869. Capital city of Northern Ireland, where murals commemorate the Troubles.
Answer: Belfast (2) British Prime Minister targeted by an assassination attempt at the Brighton Hotel in

870. Dictator who ordered the death of Leon Trotsky and was succeeded by Nikita Khrushchev.
Answer: Joseph Stalin

871. Soviet-­‐led counterpart of NATO, composed of Eastern Bloc countries.
Answer: Warsaw Pact

872. European country where the Soviets crushed Imre Nagy’s [nahj’s] rebellion in 1956.
Answer: Hungary

873. Genocidal famine in Ukraine from 1932-­‐33.
Answer: Holodomor

874. Name for both US-­‐Soviet treaties that limited ballistic missile production.
Answer: SALT 1 and/or 2 (or Strategic Arms Limitation Talks) Page 6

875. Title given to the rulers of ancient Egypt.
Answer: pharaoh

876. Primary Egyptian river that flooded during the season of Akhet.
Answer: Nile River

877. Boy king whose tomb was re-­‐discovered by Howard Carter in 1922.
Answer: King Tutankhamun

878. Stone dedicated to Ptolemy V that was used to decipher hieroglyphics.
Answer: Ro

879. Document that provides instructions for those being judged by Ma’at.
Answer: Egyptian Book of the Dead

880. Region south of Upper Egypt that was home to the Abu Simbel temples.
Answer: Nubia Page 7

881. The mishandling of the Railway Protection movement sparked this event and culminated in the Battle of Yangxia. The forces of the Tongmenghui played a key role in this event, which begun with the (+) Wuchang Uprising. Yuan Shikai used the Beiyang Army to become provisional (*) President during this event and forced the abdication of Emperor Puyi. For ten points, name this revolution led by Sun Yat-­‐Sen which ended the Qing Dynasty and led to the establishment of the Republic of China.
Answer: Xinhai Revolution (

882. This modern day country was briefly mortgaged in the 16th century to a German banking family whose sons wanted to search for the Fountain of Youth. This country’s city of Coro is one of the oldest European cities founded in the Americas. This country, which was named for (+) stilted houses in lagoons that reminded Spanish colonists of a European city, is officially a “Bolivarian Republic” to commemorate (*) Simon Bolivar, who was born here. For ten points, name this country where Spanish colonists founded cities like Maracaibo and Caracas.
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

883. An early version of this work uses the phrase “waiting in the weeds,” later changed to “waiting in the wings.” In this work, a boy sings in French, then recites a poem on his ninth (+) birthday to his father. The protagonist of this work is told to “talk less” and “smile more” by the antagonist, who later laments that “the world was (*) wide enough” for both himself and the title character after they duel at Weehawken. For ten points, name this Lin-­‐Manuel Miranda musical about the first treasury secretary, who was killed in a duel with Aaron Burr.
Answer: Hamilton: An American Musical (

884. This group formed the Confederation of Cologne and conducted a bombardment of Copenhagen, forcing Valdemar IV to grant them increased privileges. This group was plagued by the forces of Albert of Mecklenburg and the (+) Victual Brothers, and it suffered a setback when Ivan III shut down their operations in Novgorod. This group was prominent in Bergen and Stralsund, but it was dominated by (*) Lubeck in its early stages. A series of kontor trading posts was administered by, for ten points, what Northern European merchants guild formed during the Late Middle Ages?
Answer: Hanseatic League (

885. A palace on the future site of the Colosseum built by Nero was known as the house of this material. When Heinrich (+) Schliemann discovered an artifact of this material in Mycenae, it convinced him he found the body of a legendary Homeric king. This material, which is combined with (*) ivory to make chryselephantine sculptures, was used to mint a coin worth 25 denarii [day-­‐ NAR-­‐ee-­‐ee] called the aureus. The funeral mask of Agamemnon is made of, for ten points, what yellowish precious metal?
Answer: gold Page 8

886. This event is the subject of the 2006 documentary Freedom's Fury, narrated by Mark Spitz, who was coached by a central figure of it. This event was stopped with a minute left to play, and its declared winner then defeated (+) Yugoslavia 2-­‐1 to win the gold medal. An iconic photo from this event shows Ervin Zador in with a massive cut near his (*) eye which was caused by a punch in the face by Valentin Prokopov. For ten points, name this Olympic contest between two countries involved in a 1956 revolution in Budapest.
Answer: Blood in the Water Match (

887. Hostilities that this treaty failed to end were later resolved through the Treaties of Baden and Rastatt. Under this treaty, 200 years after Tordesillas, Portugal’s control of Brazil was finally recognized. Great Britain gained (+) Gibraltar and the asiento, a monopoly on the slave trade, through this treaty. Under this treaty, a claim to the (*) French throne was renounced by Philip of Anjou so that he could be king of an Iberian country. For ten points, name this treaty that ended the War of Spanish Succession.
Answer: Treaty (or Peace, etc.) of Utrecht

888. Lieutenant Braunersreuther [brown-­‐ers-­‐roy-­‐ter] demanded that forces on this island surrender within 30 minutes, receiving their surrender 29 minutes later. Defending forces on this island lacked proper guns, so they rowed to the (+) USS Charleston to verbally return what they thought was a salute; instead, those were warning shots, as the US had declared war on (*) Spain. For ten points, name this island where a completely bloodless surrender took place in 1898 and which is still an American territory in the western Pacific Ocean.
Answer: Guam

889. In this modern day country, Eyre Coote was victorious at the Battle of Wandiwash, leading to the end of France’s presence here during the (+) Carnatic theatre of the Seven Years’ War. A gunpowder-­‐dampening rainstorm helped Robert Clive gain a victory against Mir (*) Jafar in this modern-­‐day country. For ten points, name this country where the Battle of Plassey enabled the dominance of a British joint stock company and, later, the British Raj?
Answer: India BONUS: This Byzantine Emperor, the husband of Theodora, tasked Belisarius with reconquering lost territory in Africa. Justinian the Great (

890. In this war, a group of German mercenaries under French leadership called Lauzun’s Legion saw action at White Plains. A German officer in this war ordered the establishment of separate toilets and kitchens and educated troops about marching orders during a brutal winter encampment. A group of Hessian soldiers in this war were defeated in a surprise attack the day after Christmas in the Battle of Trenton. For ten points, name this war in which Baron von Steuben drilled troops at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, during the winter of 1777.
Answer: American Revolutionary War (or American Revolution

891. A ruler of this city has a dream in which he sees a statue with a gold head, a bronze belly, and clay feet. A Biblical figure partially named for this city is described as sitting on top of a scarlet beast with seven heads and ten horns. The Book of Ezekiel was composed while Ezekiel was in this city, which names a whore encountered in the Book of Revelation. The Book of Daniel tells of Nebuchadnezzar II, the ruler of, for ten points, what city where the Jews were held in a namesake period of captivity?
Answer: Babylon (

892. This modern day country obtained de facto independence from the Holy Roman Empire after the Swabian War. France obtained Burgundy shortly after Charles the Bold died fighting a force primarily from this country at the Battle of Nancy. German Landsknechts imitated pike and halberd-­‐wielding mercenaries from this country, whose neutrality was affirmed during the Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this Alpine country with capital at Bern that remained neutral in both world wars.
Answer: Switzerland (

893. This composer likely hired horn players from Bohemia for the premiere of a piece whose first suite, in F major, includes an “Adagio e staccato” movement. This composer included “La Paix” [la pay] in a suite for wind band written to celebrate the Treaty of Aix-­‐La-­‐Chapelle, and he included hornpipes in a piece written for a concert for King George I held on a barge on the Thames. For ten points, name this German-­‐born English composer of Music for the Royal Fireworks and Water Music.
Answer: George Friedrich Handel

894. A man with this surname designed his country's first postage stamp and helped drive the last spike into the Canada Pacific Railway. The inventor of time zones, Sandford, had this surname, which he shares with a biologist whose most famous discovery was tested by Howard Florey's clinical trials; that man with this surname noticed inhibitory behavior in a dish of staphylococci bacteria. For ten points, what surname is shared by the discoverer of penicillin, Alexander?
Answer: Fleming (

895. This man said “I am very sorry it is taking me so long to die” after attempting suicide during his arrest. The Imperial Rule Assistance Political Association was created by this man, who suggested not executing the pilots of the Doolittle Raid in fear of American retaliation. After being arrested, this man was given a new pair of dentures which had the phrase “remember Pearl Harbor” written in Morse Code. For ten points, name this politician who served as Japan’s Prime Minister from 1941 to 1944.
Answer: Hideki Tojo Page 1

896. This thinker’s concept of the “efficient cause” in the natural world was continued by his successor, Theophrastus. A graded scale of perfection established by this man to classify living organisms is known as his “Great Chain of Being.” This philosopher, who was exiled by Eurymedon the Hierophant, was accused by Hagnothemis of poisoning his most famous pupil, Alexander the Great. For ten points, name this Ancient Greek founder of the Lyceum and student of Plato.
Answer: Aristotle

897. During this campaign, the phrase "Washing Machine Charlie" was used to indicate planes carrying out nighttime attacks. Alexander Patch was the U.S. Army commander in this campaign, during which four Allied cruisers were sunk during an engagement at Savo Island. Henderson Field was a key objective during this battle, which was codenamed Operation Watchtower. This six-­‐month-­‐long battle began in August 1942 after Marines landed on a namesake island and the nearby Tulagi. For ten points, name this World War II campaign that took place in the Solomon Islands.
Answer: Battle of Guadalcanal (or Guadalcanal Campaign, etc.

898. Edouard de Laboulaye proposed this structure as an international effort. After this structure was completed on Bedloe’s Island, it was celebrated with its city’s first ticker-­‐tape parade. This monument’s base features an Emma Lazarus poem with the verses “give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses” called “The New Colossus.” For ten points, name this Frederic Bartholdi-­‐designed sculpture that bears a copper torch in New York Harbor.
Answer: Statue of Liberty (or Liberty Enlightening the World

899. One leader in these conflicts saw a vision of three suns before his victory at Mortimer’s Cross. For switching sides in these conflicts, Richard Neville, the Earl of Warwick, was known as the Kingmaker. These conflicts ended when Richard III was defeated by Henry VII at Bosworth, ushering in the Tudor dynasty. For ten points, name these conflicts between the rival English houses of Lancaster and York, named for their respective red and white flower badges.
Answer: Wars of the Roses Page 2

900. Many perpetrators of this event were tried in Gacaca courts due to a backlog in the traditional justice system. The large number of refugees fleeing this event led to the Great Lakes Crisis in a neighboring country. This event was hastened by rebel forces taking Gisenyi two weeks after the Interahamwe militia lost the capital city of Kigali. Paul Kagame [kuh-­‐GAH-­‐may] became Vice President after the end of, for ten points, what 1994 event in which the Hutus massacred their Tutsi countrymen in a central African country?
Answer: Rwandan Genocide (

901. This man refused a promotion to a desk job by saying “every poor fellow in the trenches must do his duty.” Donald Cunnel is credited with inflicting a serious head wound on this man, who attempted to kill Wilfred May but was stopped by Arthur Brown. Propaganda about this man stated the British would automatically award a Victoria Cross to anyone that could kill him. The Flying Circus was led by, for ten points, what World War I German aviator commonly known by a colorful noble title?
Answer: Manfred (Albrecht Freiherr) von Richthofen (

902. Ronald Ridenhour exposed this event in a damning letter to Congress, while Seymour Hersh was the first reporter to break this story. Ernest Medina was told to kill everything "walking, crawling, or growling" during this event, which was mitigated by interventions from Hugh Thompson's helicopter crew. This war crime was carried out by Charlie Company in the hamlets surrounding Son My [son mee]. For ten points, name this massacre carried out by the US Army during the Vietnam War.
Answer: My Lai [mee lee] massacre (

903. This battle was preceded by a gift of sports balls to remind the winning king that he should stick to tennis. The fall of Harfleur prompted the losing side to fight this battle. At this battle, the order to kill all prisoners was given after Henry V feared that his baggage train would be overrun. This battle’s losing side could not use cavalry thanks to stakes placed in muddy ground; instead the winning side’s longbowmen fired at will. For ten points, name this 1415 battle fought on St. Crispin’s Day, a victory for England in the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt BONUS: The English longbow also played a big role in this 1346 battle, where it prevailed over Genoese crossbows. Shortly after this battle, Calais [cah-­‐lay] fell to England. Battle of Crecy

904. A 1915 law was passed just to grant this specific status to Kojo Houénou [ko-­‐jo hoo-­‐ay-­‐noo] and Ouanilo Béhanzin [wah-­‐nee-­‐lo beh-­‐han-­‐zin]. Women who married foreigners were not allowed to retain this status until 1973. The Constitution of 1791 distinguished between active and passive forms of this status. This status was extended to Algerian Jews in the Crémieux [creh-­‐m'yew] Decree. For ten points, name this status that can be acquired "by spilled blood" by French soldiers, who can then vote in certain European elections.
Answer: French citizenship Bonus: Many soldiers who obtained citizenship through the spilled blood provision fought in which section of the French armed forces, whose name signifies its openness to soldiers from other countries? French Foreign Legion

905. In an unfinished story from this collection, Canace finds a falcon who was abandoned by her lover and then shows a romantic interest in her brother, who is also Genghis Khan’s son. In this collection’s first story, Palamon and Arcite fight in a massive battle to win Emily’s hand in marraige. Characters in this work include the Squire and his father, the Knight, who tell stories during their pilgrimage to the shrine of Thomas Becket. For ten points, name this story collection by Geoffrey Chaucer.
Answer: The Canterbury Tales BONUS: Geoffrey Chaucer wrote The Canterbury Tales in this language, which was in use from approximately the Norman conquest of Britain through the 16th century. Middle English (

906. This battle’s Operation Griffin included a violation of the Hague Convention when Otto Skorzeny dressed his troops in enemy uniforms. During this battle, American troops were fired on after surrendering at Malmedy. Anthony McAuliffe led a spirited defense of the town of Bastogne in this battle, whose losing side tried to use tanks to recreate the 1941 invasion of France. For ten points, name this 1944 battle that made a namesake shape in Allied lines.
Answer: Battle of the Bulge (

907. After this dynasty's Emperor Taiding died, it suffered the War of the Two Capitals. This dynasty, which gained power after winning the Battle of Yamen, built its capital at Dadu. The Red Turban Revolt, which included the future Hongwu emperor, successfully overthrew this dynasty. The founder of this dynasty had previously won the Toluid Civil War after Mongke Khan died. Marco Polo recorded visiting, for the point, what Mongol Chinese dynasty that preceded the Ming?
Answer: Yuan Dynasty BONUS: The 1279 Battle of Yamen was decisive in ending this dynasty's rule of China. (Southern) Song Dynasty Third Quarter The categories are ...

908. Capital city of Northern Ireland, where murals commemorate the Troubles.
Answer: Belfast (2) British Prime Minister targeted by an assassination attempt at the Brighton Hotel in

909. Dictator who ordered the death of Leon Trotsky and was succeeded by Nikita Khrushchev.
Answer: Joseph Stalin

910. Soviet-­‐led counterpart of NATO, composed of Eastern Bloc countries.
Answer: Warsaw Pact

911. European country where the Soviets crushed Imre Nagy’s [nahj’s] rebellion in 1956.
Answer: Hungary

912. 1959 event in which Nixon and Khrushchev debated capitalism and communism in a model home.
Answer: Kitchen Debate

913. Genocidal famine in Ukraine from 1932-­‐33.
Answer: Holodomor

914. Name for both US-­‐Soviet treaties that limited ballistic missile production.
Answer: SALT 1 and/or 2 (or Strategic Arms Limitation Talks)

915. Title given to the rulers of ancient Egypt.
Answer: pharaoh

916. Primary Egyptian river that flooded during the season of Akhet.
Answer: Nile River

917. Boy king whose tomb was re-­‐discovered by Howard Carter in 1922.
Answer: King Tutankhamun

918. Stone dedicated to Ptolemy V that was used to decipher hieroglyphics.
Answer: Ro

919. 1274 BC battle against the Hittites, the largest chariot battle in history.
Answer: Battle of Kadesh

920. Document that provides instructions for those being judged by Ma’at.
Answer: Egyptian Book of the Dead

921. Region south of Upper Egypt that was home to the Abu Simbel temples.
Answer: Nubia

922. Ruler who briefly succeeded Akhenaten, but who may actually just have been Nefertiti disguised as a man.
Answer: Smenkhare (or Smenkhkare) Page 8

923. The mishandling of the Railway Protection movement sparked this event and culminated in the Battle of Yangxia. The forces of the Tongmenghui played a key role in this event, which begun with the (+) Wuchang Uprising. Yuan Shikai used the Beiyang Army to become provisional (*) President during this event and forced the abdication of Emperor Puyi. For ten points, name this revolution led by Sun Yat-­‐Sen which ended the Qing Dynasty and led to the establishment of the Republic of China.
Answer: Xinhai Revolution (

924. This modern day country was briefly mortgaged in the 16th century to a German banking family whose sons wanted to search for the Fountain of Youth. This country’s city of Coro is one of the oldest European cities founded in the Americas. This country, which was named for (+) stilted houses in lagoons that reminded Spanish colonists of a European city, is officially a “Bolivarian Republic” to commemorate (*) Simon Bolivar, who was born here. For ten points, name this country where Spanish colonists founded cities like Maracaibo and Caracas.
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

925. An early version of this work uses the phrase “waiting in the weeds,” later changed to “waiting in the wings.” In this work, a boy sings in French, then recites a poem on his ninth (+) birthday to his father. The protagonist of this work is told to “talk less” and “smile more” by the antagonist, who later laments that “the world was (*) wide enough” for both himself and the title character after they duel at Weehawken. For ten points, name this Lin-­‐Manuel Miranda musical about the first treasury secretary, who was killed in a duel with Aaron Burr.
Answer: Hamilton: An American Musical (

926. This group formed the Confederation of Cologne and conducted a bombardment of Copenhagen, forcing Valdemar IV to grant them increased privileges. This group was plagued by the forces of Albert of Mecklenburg and the (+) Victual Brothers, and it suffered a setback when Ivan III shut down their operations in Novgorod. This group was prominent in Bergen and Stralsund, but it was dominated by (*) Lubeck in its early stages. A series of kontor trading posts was administered by, for ten points, what Northern European merchants guild formed during the Late Middle Ages?
Answer: Hanseatic League (

927. A palace on the future site of the Colosseum built by Nero was known as the house of this material. When Heinrich (+) Schliemann discovered an artifact of this material in Mycenae, it convinced him he found the body of a legendary Homeric king. This material, which is combined with (*) ivory to make chryselephantine sculptures, was used to mint a coin worth 25 denarii [day-­‐ NAR-­‐ee-­‐ee] called the aureus. The funeral mask of Agamemnon is made of, for ten points, what yellowish precious metal?
Answer: gold Page 9

928. This event is the subject of the 2006 documentary Freedom's Fury, narrated by Mark Spitz, who was coached by a central figure of it. This event was stopped with a minute left to play, and its declared winner then defeated (+) Yugoslavia 2-­‐1 to win the gold medal. An iconic photo from this event shows Ervin Zador in with a massive cut near his (*) eye which was caused by a punch in the face by Valentin Prokopov. For ten points, name this Olympic contest between two countries involved in a 1956 revolution in Budapest.
Answer: Blood in the Water Match (

929. Hostilities that this treaty failed to end were later resolved through the Treaties of Baden and Rastatt. Under this treaty, 200 years after Tordesillas, Portugal’s control of Brazil was finally recognized. Great Britain gained (+) Gibraltar and the asiento, a monopoly on the slave trade, through this treaty. Under this treaty, a claim to the (*) French throne was renounced by Philip of Anjou so that he could be king of an Iberian country. For ten points, name this treaty that ended the War of Spanish Succession.
Answer: Treaty (or Peace, etc.) of Utrecht

930. Lieutenant Braunersreuther [brown-­‐ers-­‐roy-­‐ter] demanded that forces on this island surrender within 30 minutes, receiving their surrender 29 minutes later. Defending forces on this island lacked proper guns, so they rowed to the (+) USS Charleston to verbally return what they thought was a salute; instead, those were warning shots, as the US had declared war on (*) Spain. For ten points, name this island where a completely bloodless surrender took place in 1898 and which is still an American territory in the western Pacific Ocean.
Answer: Guam

931. In this modern day country, Eyre Coote was victorious at the Battle of Wandiwash, leading to the end of France’s presence here during the (+) Carnatic theatre of the Seven Years’ War. A gunpowder-­‐dampening rainstorm helped Robert Clive gain a victory against Mir (*) Jafar in this modern-­‐day country. For ten points, name this country where the Battle of Plassey enabled the dominance of a British joint stock company and, later, the British Raj?
Answer: India BONUS: This Byzantine Emperor, the husband of Theodora, tasked Belisarius with reconquering lost territory in Africa. Justinian the Great (

932. This owner of the Naples Estate was specifically targeted for capture or elimination by the first Search Bloc. This man agreed to a period of nominal captivity at La Catedral prison in exchange for a deal preventing his extradition to the U.S. For ten points, name this leader of the Medellin Cartel who was the leading smuggler of cocaine prior to his 1993 death in Colombia.
Answer: Pablo Escobar

933. As a teenager, this thinker built a calculator to aid his father’s work as a tax supervisor. This man developed a law stating that a change in pressure at a point in a fluid is transmitted equally throughout the entire fluid. This man, who argued in support of Jansenism in Provincial Letters, names a diagram that conveniently displays the binomial coefficients; each value equals the sum of the two numbers above it in that “triangle.” For ten points, name this 17th century French polymath.
Answer: Blaise Pascal

934. This man was known as the “fierce” in his early years after murdering 99 of his 100 brothers. This man, who rose to power after tricking Sushima into a pit of hot coals, was traumatized by seeing the Daya river allegedly run red with blood in the Kalinga wars. This son of Bindusara erected a rock edict at Sarnath detailing the importance of good deeds and adherence to Dharma. For ten points, name this Mauryan ruler who converted to Buddhism.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Asoka the Great)

935. One work in this genre describes three generations of tribesmen led by Seitek, Semetei, and Manas. The demon Adamastor is battled by a group of sailors in one of these pieces of literature that tells of Vasco de Gama’s voyage to India. Elias Lonrot compiled one of these works of literature from oral tradition, including the story of the creation of the Sampo. The Lusiads and the Kalevala are examples of, for ten points, what type of literature with a grand scope, such as the Odyssey?
Answer: epic poems (

936. One artist from this country showed the key to city of Breda being surrendered to a general of this country’s army. In another work, the same artist included a self-­‐portrait next to the reflection of this country’s King Phillip IV in a mirror. Another painter active in this country was born in Crete and painted a landscape showing a “View of” of this country’s city of Toledo [toh-­‐LAY-­‐doh]. For ten points, name this Iberian country home to the artist of Las Meninas, Diego Velazquez.
Answer: Spain

937. This event led to the termination of the Kharkiv Pact, which had allowed one of this event's participants to lease the other's naval bases in exchange for lower gas prices. Serhiy Kokurin became the first person killed in this event when Igor Strelkov's forces attacked a Simferopol military base. The G8 became the G7 in response to this event. Sergey Aksyonov declared a secession during, For ten points, what early 2014 act of aggression that, despite the presence of military forces in Sevastopol, Vladimir Putin refuses to call an annexation?
Answer: Russian annexation of Crimea (

938. This man wrote that Catholicism and Marxism were incompatible, as Marxism has been used as a weapon to disobey the Christian faith. David Yallop speculated that this man was poisoned to prevent further investigation of Paul Marcinkus and Roberto Calvi. This man’s death caused the most recent Year of Three Popes, as he was only in office for just over a month. For ten points, name this Pope who was succeeded in 1978 by Karol Wojtyla [voy-­‐twah], a Polish cardinal whose papal name honored this man.
Answer: John Paul I (or Albino Luciani

939. During this country's rule by the Cambio 90 party, Vladimir Montesinos operated the SIN secret police. In this country, the government responded to the Tarata bombing by sending the Grupo Colina to target subversive students. The Marxist Shining Path rebels fought against the government of this country, which became a dictatorship in the years following Alberto Fujimori's electoral victory over Mario Vargas Llosa. For ten points, name this country where terrorist attacks were carried out in the affluent Miraflores suburb of Lima.
Answer: Peru Second Quarter

940. This scientist sent Humphry Davy a 300-­‐page book of notes he had taken at his lectures, which led to Davy hiring this man as an assistant after he damaged his eyesight. This man, who performed the "ice pail" experiment and discovered benzene, had his work given a mathematical treatment by James Clark Maxwell. Electric and magnetic fields were discovered by, for ten points, what British scientist who names the law of induction and a type of "cage?"
Answer: Michael Faraday BONUS: Michael Faraday began the Royal Institute tradition of delivering an annual lecture for the public, especially children, on this day of the year. December 25 (

941. This composer quoted the “Habanera” from Bizet’s [bee-­‐zay’s] Carmen in the opening movement of a symphony whose finale was described as a “parody of shrillness” in the spurious autobiography Testimony. An opera by this composer focusing on Katerina Izmailova prompted Joseph Stalin to denounce him as “formalist” in the article “Muddle Instead of Music.” For ten points, what persecuted composer of Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District dubbed his Fifth Symphony “A Soviet Artist’s Reply to Just Criticism” and wrote fifteen symphonies in total?
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich BONUS: “Muddle Instead of Music,” as well as an additional article denouncing Shostakovich entitled “Ballet Falsehood,” was published in what official Soviet newspaper? Pravda Page 2

942. In this city, security guard Harald Jager [yay-­‐ger] became a hero after refusing to stop a stampeding crowd. Tensions in this city were heightened as the result of a barricade erected in Operation Rose, culminating in a tank stand off near this city’s Checkpoint Charlie. During Ronald Reagan’s visit to this city, a request to “open this gate” was issued to Mikhail Gorbachev, along with a challenge to “tear down this wall.” For ten points, name this German city that was divided into east and west during the Cold War.
Answer: Berlin (

943. This building’s shadow can be used to tell time, thanks to a nearby park designed in the shape of sundial. Three gold coins with rectangular holes are the logo of this building, which was designed to appear as multiple money boxes stacked atop each other in the feng shui style by architect C.Y. Lee. This was the world’s tallest building until 2010, when it was surpassed by the Burj Khalifa. For ten points, name this Taiwanese skyscraper.
Answer: Taipei 101 BONUS: This Malaysian skyscraper was surpassed by Taipei 101 as the world’s tallest building in

944. This former communist recently faced impeachment after the case Economic Freedom Fighters v. Speaker of the National Assembly ruled that he had siphoned funds meant to upgrade the Nkandla house. During this man's 2005 rape trial, he claimed that he took a shower to prevent himself from contracting HIV. Improper ties to the Gupta family helped bring down, for ten points, what former President of South Africa?
Answer: Jacob Zuma BONUS: As president, Zuma governed South Africa from which city, which together with Johannesburg and Bloemfontein is one of the three capitals of South Africa? Pretoria

945. This empire was plunged into a series of civil wars after the assassinations of Berdibek and Janibeg, and it was dissolved after Akhmat backed down against troops from former vassal kingdoms at a standoff at the Ugra River. This empire’s power diminished after Dmitri Donskoy liberated Moscow at the Battle of Kulikovo. The cities of Old and New Sarai were capitals of, for ten points, what kingdom that stretched into Western Europe, a Mongol horde named for the color of its tents?
Answer: Golden Horde (

946. While working on his Ph.D. in this city, Frederic Thrasher undertook a comprehensive study of 1,313 of its gangs. Sudhir Venkatesh’s Gang Leader for a Day relied on field research in this city, where Venkatesh also collected data on prostitutes that was presented in a 2005 book. That work, Freakonomics, was co-­‐written by Steven Levitt, an economics professor who works in this city. Twelve Nobel Prizes in Economics have been awarded to professors like Milton Friedman who teach in, for ten points, what Midwestern city?
Answer: Chicago BONUS: The Chicago school of economics generally rejects the theories of this British economist, who advocated deficit spending to spur economies out of recessions. John Maynard Keynes ([canes], but be lenient

947. During this battle, citizens defended themselves by removing guns from the ship Aurora and mounting them atop the Pulkovo Heights. Operation Northern Light brought the Gustav rail gun from the Crimea to this battle. Defenders in this battle were resupplied via the “Road of Life,” where supplies were transported across the frozen Lake Ladoga. In 1941, Army Group North began, for ten points, what 900-­‐day siege of a Russian city in World War II?
Answer: Siege of Leningrad (

948. Hapsburg country led during the war by Philip IV from Madrid.
Answer: Spain

949. Official religion of possessions of the Hapsburg family, which opposed the Protestant Union.
Answer: Roman Catholicism

950. “Red Eminence,” an adviser to Louis XIII who oversaw French intervention during the war.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu (or Armand Jean du Plessis)

951. City where regents were defenestrated, or tossed out of a third-­‐story window, to begin the war.
Answer: Prague

952. Peace negotiated to conclude the war, the result of the treaties of Osnabruck and Munster.
Answer: Peace of Westphalia

953. Commander of Swedish forces during the Thirty Years’ War until his death at Lutzen.
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus Page 5

954. Sunk on its maiden voyage in 1912 after hitting an iceberg, killing well over 1,000 people.
Answer: RMS Titanic

955. Gained the nickname “Old Ironsides” after fighting the Guerriere.
Answer: USS Constitution

956. Was Horatio Nelson’s flagship when he was shot at Trafalgar.
Answer: HMS Victory

957. Destroyed the Hood at the Battle of Denmark Strait and was sunk three days later.
Answer: Bismarck

958. Sunk, and is now a memorial, at Pearl Harbor.
Answer: USS Arizona (Memorial)

959. Was the type of ship that the Yamato was, the largest of its type built by Japan.
Answer: Battleship Page 6

960. Middle Eastern city captured and called a "Kingdom" after the end of the First Crusade.
Answer: Jerusalem

961. English King taken prisoner while returning from the Third Crusade, known as the "Lionheart."
Answer: Richard I (

962. Catholic military order founded in 1139 who wore distinctive white mantles with red crosses on them.
Answer: Knights Templar

963. Pope who started the Fourth Crusade in 1202, with the intention of reaching the Holy Land through Egypt.
Answer: Innocent III (

964. Total number of Crusades with numbers in their titles.
Answer: 9

965. Christian movement prominent in southern France; it was considered a heresy by the Catholic Church, causing the Albigensian Crusade in 1209.
Answer: Catharism (

966. The saying "Mahu will get you" was inspired by an authoritarian overseer of this project who allegedly ate children. The shipwrecked Korean official Choe (+) Bu studied this system in the 15th century during his travels from Suzhou to Tongzhou. The Kaiheji records the construction of this feature, which was initiated under Emperor Wen. (*) Lock gates in the sixth century greatly improved the navigability of this feature, which ends in Hangzhou. For ten points, name this project, begun under the Sui [swee] Dynasty, that connected the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers.
Answer: Grand Canal of China (

967. At one of these places, police captain Johan Mahieu failed to prevent a concrete wall from crushing civilians; Mahieu was later convicted of manslaughter for his role in the Heysel disaster. After misassigning blame in the wake of the (+) Hillsborough disaster at another of these structures, the Sun newspaper was banned from the city of Liverpool. White Hart Lane, another of these structures, was demolished in August 2017, so (*) Tottenham Hotspur’s temporary home is now Wembley. Old Trafford and Anfield are other examples of, for ten points, what European sporting venues for teams like Manchester United?
Answer: European football stadiums (

968. In the Treaty of Ryswick, Spain formally recognized French control of Acadia and a colony in this location. In this location, the one-­‐armed Francois Mackandal led raids on plantation owners. Shortly before the dissolution of a colony here, it was struck by an outbreak of (+) yellow fever that killed general Charles Leclerc. A decade-­‐long slave revolt here was led by figures like (*) Jean-­‐Jacques Dessalines and Toussaint Louverture. The French colony of Saint-­‐ Domingue [sahn doh-­‐MEENG] was located in, for ten points, what modern-­‐day country on the western half of Hispaniola?
Answer: Haiti (

969. As a lieutenant-­‐colonel, this man led a bayonet charge on the left flank during the Battle of Mallavelly before failing in his first attack on Seringapatam in the Anglo-­‐Mysore War. This resident of Apsley House threatened to (+) resign if the Catholic Relief Act of 1829 was not passed; that unpopular decision that may have contributed to his nickname of (*) "Iron Duke." In another battle, this man famously said that either "night or the Prussians must come;" Blücher's Prussians did. For ten points, name this English general who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo.
Answer: Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington (

970. In a 2004 video, this man spoke of his experience fighting "tyrannical superpowers," having "bled Russia for 10 years." This man funded the Luxor Massacre and was inspired by damage sustained during the Siege of Beirut to plan another attack. (+) Barack Obama told Leon Panetta that this man was a top priority. From the USS Carl Vinson, this man's remains were (*) buried at sea before the May 2, 2011 announcement of his death. Operation Neptune Spear targeted, ftp, what leader of al-­‐Qaeda and mastermind of the 9/11 terrorist attacks?
Answer: Osama bin Laden Page 8

971. These people upset the Marquis of Pombal by defending so-­‐called “Reductions” that housed Guarani natives in (+) South America. Clement XIV refused to meet with a leader of this group, Lorenzo Ricci, and ultimately suppressed them in 1773. The Tavora Affair ended with the (*) expulsion of these people from Portugal, making teaching of the Spiritual Exercises illegal. For ten points, name this powerful missionary order that was founded by Ignatius of Loyola.
Answer: Jesuits (

972. A lone rider before this battle offered “seven feet of English ground” to this battle’s losing commander, saying “he is taller than most men.” During this battle, a (+) Norse axeman held up the winning side’s troops on a bridge until he was speared by a soldier from under the bridge. Tostig, the brother of the winning commander of this battle, was killed in it. Following this battle, another force (*) landed at Pevensey. Harald Hardrada died in a defeat to Harold Godwinson at, for ten points, what September 1066 battle, fought three weeks before Hastings?
Answer: Battle of Stamford Bridge

973. A symbolic defeat for this religion occurred when the "bora winds" redirected one side's arrows back at the archers during the Battle of the Frigid River. Members of this religion, who twice had their "Altar of (+) Victory" desecrated, faced new restrictions after the Theodosian Decrees were issued. As the last (*) emperor to follow this religion, Julian was known as the Apostate. This religion was overshadowed by a monotheistic faith after the Edict of Milan. For ten points, name this ancient religion that, before it was supplanted by Christianity, officially honored Janus, Jupiter, and Mars.
Answer: traditional Roman religion (

974. This man worked with his son-­‐in-­‐law Henry Ireton to win the Confederate Wars and conquer Ireland, a campaign that featured this man infamously sacking the town of (+) Drogheda when it refused to surrender. With Thomas Fairfax, this man masterminded a great victory at (*) Naseby while commanding the New Model Army into battle against the Cavalier faction of loyalists that supported Charles I. For ten points, name this man who was named Lord Protector of England after the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell BONUS: Marcus Aurelius succeeded this Roman emperor, his adoptive father. This husband of Faustina the Elder died at age 75 from a fever possibly brought on by bad cheese. Antoninus Pius (or Titus Aurelius Fulvius Boionius Arrius Antoninus) Page 9

975. The author of Black Hawk Down, Mark Bowden, wrote the definitive biography of this man in 2001. This owner of the Naples Estate was specifically targeted for capture or elimination by the first Search Bloc. This man agreed to a period of nominal captivity at La Catedral prison in exchange for a deal preventing his extradition to the U.S. For ten points, name this leader of the Medellin Cartel who was the leading smuggler of cocaine prior to his 1993 death in Colombia.
Answer: Pablo Escobar

976. As a teenager, this thinker built a calculator to aid his father’s work as a tax supervisor. This man developed a law stating that a change in pressure at a point in a fluid is transmitted equally throughout the entire fluid. This man, who argued in support of Jansenism in Provincial Letters, names a diagram that conveniently displays the binomial coefficients; each value equals the sum of the two numbers above it in that “triangle.” For ten points, name this 17th century French polymath.
Answer: Blaise Pascal

977. The Pont Neuf was completed during the reign of this French monarch; its financing was overseen by this man’s chief minister, Maximilien de Bethune, the Duke of Sully. This king’s mistress, Gabrielle d’Estrees [dess-­‐tray], supposedly convinced him to proclaim that Paris was “well worth a mass” when he converted from Protestantism to Catholicism. For ten points, name this king who supported religious toleration via the Edict of Nantes, the first monarch from the House of Bourbon.
Answer: Henry IV (

978. During this war, covering fire from David Conner’s Home Squadron allowed a commander to land his forces uncontested on Collado [co-­‐yah-­‐doh] Beach. Fighting centered around the fort of San Juan de Ulua eventually forced the surrender of Juan Morales in this war. After the battles of Monterrey and Buena Vista, Zachary Taylor’s forces were given to Winfield Scott in preparation for the siege of a major seaport. For ten points, name this 1846-­‐1848 war in which the city of Veracruz was besieged by American forces.
Answer: Mexican-­‐American War (“American” not needed after mentioned at the end)

979. This man was known as the “fierce” in his early years after murdering 99 of his 100 brothers. This man, who rose to power after tricking Sushima into a pit of hot coals, was traumatized by seeing the Daya river allegedly run red with blood in the Kalinga wars. This son of Bindusara erected a rock edict at Sarnath detailing the importance of good deeds and adherence to Dharma. For ten points, name this Mauryan ruler who converted to Buddhism.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Asoka the Great)

980. One work in this genre describes three generations of tribesmen led by Seitek, Semetei, and Manas. The demon Adamastor is battled by a group of sailors in one of these pieces of literature that tells of Vasco de Gama’s voyage to India. Elias Lonrot compiled one of these works of literature from oral tradition, including the story of the creation of the Sampo. The Lusiads and the Kalevala are examples of, for ten points, what type of literature with a grand scope, such as the Odyssey?
Answer: epic poems (

981. One artist from this country showed the key to city of Breda being surrendered to a general of this country’s army. In another work, the same artist included a self-­‐portrait next to the reflection of this country’s King Phillip IV in a mirror. Another painter active in this country was born in Crete and painted a landscape showing a “View of” of this country’s city of Toledo [toh-­‐LAY-­‐doh]. For ten points, name this Iberian country home to the artist of Las Meninas, Diego Velazquez.
Answer: Spain

982. This event led to the termination of the Kharkiv Pact, which had allowed one of this event's participants to lease the other's naval bases in exchange for lower gas prices. Serhiy Kokurin became the first person killed in this event when Igor Strelkov's forces attacked a Simferopol military base. The G8 became the G7 in response to this event. Sergey Aksyonov declared a secession during, For ten points, what early 2014 act of aggression that, despite the presence of military forces in Sevastopol, Vladimir Putin refuses to call an annexation?
Answer: Russian annexation of Crimea (

983. This man wrote that Catholicism and Marxism were incompatible, as Marxism has been used as a weapon to disobey the Christian faith. David Yallop speculated that this man was poisoned to prevent further investigation of Paul Marcinkus and Roberto Calvi. This man’s death caused the most recent Year of Three Popes, as he was only in office for just over a month. For ten points, name this Pope who was succeeded in 1978 by Karol Wojtyla [voy-­‐twah], a Polish cardinal whose papal name honored this man.
Answer: John Paul I (or Albino Luciani

984. During this country's rule by the Cambio 90 party, Vladimir Montesinos operated the SIN secret police. In this country, the government responded to the Tarata bombing by sending the Grupo Colina to target subversive students. The Marxist Shining Path rebels fought against the government of this country, which became a dictatorship in the years following Alberto Fujimori's electoral victory over Mario Vargas Llosa. For ten points, name this country where terrorist attacks were carried out in the affluent Miraflores suburb of Lima.
Answer: Peru Page 2

985. This scientist sent Humphry Davy a 300-­‐page book of notes he had taken at his lectures, which led to Davy hiring this man as an assistant after he damaged his eyesight. This man, who performed the "ice pail" experiment and discovered benzene, had his work given a mathematical treatment by James Clark Maxwell. Electric and magnetic fields were discovered by, for ten points, what British scientist who names the law of induction and a type of "cage?"
Answer: Michael Faraday BONUS: Michael Faraday began the Royal Institute tradition of delivering an annual lecture for the public, especially children, on this day of the year. December 25 (

986. This composer quoted the “Habanera” from Bizet’s [bee-­‐zay’s] Carmen in the opening movement of a symphony whose finale was described as a “parody of shrillness” in the spurious autobiography Testimony. An opera by this composer focusing on Katerina Izmailova prompted Joseph Stalin to denounce him as “formalist” in the article “Muddle Instead of Music.” For ten points, what persecuted composer of Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District dubbed his Fifth Symphony “A Soviet Artist’s Reply to Just Criticism” and wrote fifteen symphonies in total?
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich BONUS: “Muddle Instead of Music,” as well as an additional article denouncing Shostakovich entitled “Ballet Falsehood,” was published in what official Soviet newspaper? Pravda

987. In this city, security guard Harald Jager [yay-­‐ger] became a hero after refusing to stop a stampeding crowd. Tensions in this city were heightened as the result of a barricade erected in Operation Rose, culminating in a tank stand off near this city’s Checkpoint Charlie. During Ronald Reagan’s visit to this city, a request to “open this gate” was issued to Mikhail Gorbachev, along with a challenge to “tear down this wall.” For ten points, name this German city that was divided into east and west during the Cold War.
Answer: Berlin (

988. This building’s shadow can be used to tell time, thanks to a nearby park designed in the shape of sundial. Three gold coins with rectangular holes are the logo of this building, which was designed to appear as multiple money boxes stacked atop each other in the feng shui style by architect C.Y. Lee. This was the world’s tallest building until 2010, when it was surpassed by the Burj Khalifa. For ten points, name this Taiwanese skyscraper.
Answer: Taipei 101 BONUS: This Malaysian skyscraper was surpassed by Taipei 101 as the world’s tallest building in

989. In 2005, this man was dismissed as Deputy President after his friend, Schabir Shaik, was convicted on fraud and corruption charges. This former communist recently faced impeachment after the case Economic Freedom Fighters v. Speaker of the National Assembly ruled that he had siphoned funds meant to upgrade the Nkandla house. During this man's 2005 rape trial, he claimed that he took a shower to prevent himself from contracting HIV. Improper ties to the Gupta family helped bring down, for ten points, what former President of South Africa?
Answer: Jacob Zuma BONUS: As president, Zuma governed South Africa from which city, which together with Johannesburg and Bloemfontein is one of the three capitals of South Africa? Pretoria

990. This empire was plunged into a series of civil wars after the assassinations of Berdibek and Janibeg, and it was dissolved after Akhmat backed down against troops from former vassal kingdoms at a standoff at the Ugra River. This empire’s power diminished after Dmitri Donskoy liberated Moscow at the Battle of Kulikovo. The cities of Old and New Sarai were capitals of, for ten points, what kingdom that stretched into Western Europe, a Mongol horde named for the color of its tents?
Answer: Golden Horde (

991. While working on his Ph.D. in this city, Frederic Thrasher undertook a comprehensive study of 1,313 of its gangs. Sudhir Venkatesh’s Gang Leader for a Day relied on field research in this city, where Venkatesh also collected data on prostitutes that was presented in a 2005 book. That work, Freakonomics, was co-­‐written by Steven Levitt, an economics professor who works in this city. Twelve Nobel Prizes in Economics have been awarded to professors like Milton Friedman who teach in, for ten points, what Midwestern city?
Answer: Chicago BONUS: The Chicago school of economics generally rejects the theories of this British economist, who advocated deficit spending to spur economies out of recessions. John Maynard Keynes ([canes], but be lenient

992. During this battle, citizens defended themselves by removing guns from the ship Aurora and mounting them atop the Pulkovo Heights. Operation Northern Light brought the Gustav rail gun from the Crimea to this battle. Defenders in this battle were resupplied via the “Road of Life,” where supplies were transported across the frozen Lake Ladoga. In 1941, Army Group North began, for ten points, what 900-­‐day siege of a Russian city in World War II?
Answer: Siege of Leningrad (

993. Hapsburg country led during the war by Philip IV from Madrid.
Answer: Spain

994. Official religion of possessions of the Hapsburg family, which opposed the Protestant Union.
Answer: Roman Catholicism

995. “Red Eminence,” an adviser to Louis XIII who oversaw French intervention during the war.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu (or Armand Jean du Plessis)

996. City where regents were defenestrated, or tossed out of a third-­‐story window, to begin the war.
Answer: Prague

997. Peace negotiated to conclude the war, the result of the treaties of Osnabruck and Munster.
Answer: Peace of Westphalia

998. Commander of Swedish forces during the Thirty Years’ War until his death at Lutzen.
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus

999. German city that was the site of a brutal 1631 sacking, the worst massacre of the war.
Answer: Sack of Magdeburg Page 6

1000. Sank on its maiden voyage in 1912 after hitting an iceberg, killing well over 1,000 people.
Answer: RMS Titanic

1001. Gained the nickname “Old Ironsides” after fighting the Guerriere.
Answer: USS Constitution

1002. Was Horatio Nelson’s flagship when he was shot at Trafalgar.
Answer: HMS Victory

1003. Destroyed the Hood at the Battle of Denmark Strait and was sunk three days later.
Answer: Bismarck

1004. Sank, and is now a memorial, at Pearl Harbor.
Answer: USS Arizona (Memorial)

1005. Was the location of the Japanese surrender after World War II.
Answer: USS Missouri

1006. Was named after a US city in the Midwest, and sank after delivering the parts for the Little Boy bomb
Answer: USS Indianapolis

1007. Was the type of ship that the Yamato was, the largest of its type built by Japan.
Answer: Battleship Page 7

1008. Middle Eastern city captured and called a "Kingdom" after the end of the First Crusade.
Answer: Jerusalem

1009. English King taken prisoner while returning from the Third Crusade, known as the "Lionheart."
Answer: Richard I (

1010. Catholic military order founded in 1139 who wore distinctive white mantles with red crosses on them.
Answer: Knights Templar

1011. Pope who started the Fourth Crusade in 1202, with the intention of reaching the Holy Land through Egypt.
Answer: Innocent III (

1012. Total number of Crusades with numbers in their titles.
Answer: 9

1013. Christian movement prominent in southern France; it was considered a heresy by the Catholic Church, causing the Albigensian Crusade in 1209.
Answer: Catharism (

1014. Byzantine ruler who prompted the First Crusade by asking Pope Urban II for defense against the Turks in 1095.
Answer: Alexius I (

1015. French abbot, and later a saint, who started the Second Crusade in 1147.
Answer: Bernard of Clairveaux Page 8

1016. The saying "Mahu will get you" was inspired by an authoritarian overseer of this project who allegedly ate children. The shipwrecked Korean official Choe (+) Bu studied this system in the 15th century during his travels from Suzhou to Tongzhou. The Kaiheji records the construction of this feature, which was initiated under Emperor Wen. (*) Lock gates in the sixth century greatly improved the navigability of this feature, which ends in Hangzhou. For ten points, name this project, begun under the Sui [swee] Dynasty, that connected the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers.
Answer: Grand Canal of China (

1017. At one of these places, police captain Johan Mahieu failed to prevent a concrete wall from crushing civilians; Mahieu was later convicted of manslaughter for his role in the Heysel disaster. After misassigning blame in the wake of the (+) Hillsborough disaster at another of these structures, the Sun newspaper was banned from the city of Liverpool. White Hart Lane, another of these structures, was demolished in August 2017, so (*) Tottenham Hotspur’s temporary home is now Wembley. Old Trafford and Anfield are other examples of, for ten points, what European sporting venues for teams like Manchester United?
Answer: European football stadiums (

1018. In the Treaty of Ryswick, Spain formally recognized French control of Acadia and a colony in this location. In this location, the one-­‐armed Francois Mackandal led raids on plantation owners. Shortly before the dissolution of a colony here, it was struck by an outbreak of (+) yellow fever that killed general Charles Leclerc. A decade-­‐long slave revolt here was led by figures like (*) Jean-­‐Jacques Dessalines and Toussaint Louverture. The French colony of Saint-­‐ Domingue [sahn doh-­‐MEENG] was located in, for ten points, what modern-­‐day country on the western half of Hispaniola?
Answer: Haiti (

1019. As a lieutenant-­‐colonel, this man led a bayonet charge on the left flank during the Battle of Mallavelly before failing in his first attack on Seringapatam in the Anglo-­‐Mysore War. This resident of Apsley House threatened to (+) resign if the Catholic Relief Act of 1829 was not passed; that unpopular decision that may have contributed to his nickname of (*) "Iron Duke." In another battle, this man famously said that either "night or the Prussians must come;" Blücher's Prussians did. For ten points, name this English general who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo.
Answer: Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of Wellington (

1020. In a 2004 video, this man spoke of his experience fighting "tyrannical superpowers," having "bled Russia for 10 years." This man funded the Luxor Massacre and was inspired by damage sustained during the Siege of Beirut to plan another attack. (+) Barack Obama told Leon Panetta that this man was a top priority. From the USS Carl Vinson, this man's remains were (*) buried at sea before the May 2, 2011 announcement of his death. Operation Neptune Spear targeted, ftp, what leader of al-­‐Qaeda and mastermind of the 9/11 terrorist attacks?
Answer: Osama bin Laden Page 9

1021. These people upset the Marquis of Pombal by defending so-­‐called “Reductions” that housed Guarani natives in (+) South America. Clement XIV refused to meet with a leader of this group, Lorenzo Ricci, and ultimately suppressed them in 1773. The Tavora Affair ended with the (*) expulsion of these people from Portugal, making teaching of the Spiritual Exercises illegal. For ten points, name this powerful missionary order that was founded by Ignatius of Loyola.
Answer: Jesuits (

1022. A lone rider before this battle offered “seven feet of English ground” to this battle’s losing commander, saying “he is taller than most men.” During this battle, a (+) Norse axeman held up the winning side’s troops on a bridge until he was speared by a soldier from under the bridge. Tostig, the brother of the winning commander of this battle, was killed in it. Following this battle, another force (*) landed at Pevensey. Harald Hardrada died in a defeat to Harold Godwinson at, for ten points, what September 1066 battle, fought three weeks before Hastings?
Answer: Battle of Stamford Bridge

1023. A symbolic defeat for this religion occurred when the "bora winds" redirected one side's arrows back at the archers during the Battle of the Frigid River. Members of this religion, who twice had their "Altar of (+) Victory" desecrated, faced new restrictions after the Theodosian Decrees were issued. As the last (*) emperor to follow this religion, Julian was known as the Apostate. This religion was overshadowed by a monotheistic faith after the Edict of Milan. For ten points, name this ancient religion that, before it was supplanted by Christianity, officially honored Janus, Jupiter, and Mars.
Answer: traditional Roman religion (

1024. This man worked with his son-­‐in-­‐law Henry Ireton to win the Confederate Wars and conquer Ireland, a campaign that featured this man infamously sacking the town of (+) Drogheda when it refused to surrender. With Thomas Fairfax, this man masterminded a great victory at (*) Naseby while commanding the New Model Army into battle against the Cavalier faction of loyalists that supported Charles I. For ten points, name this man who was named Lord Protector of England after the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell BONUS: Marcus Aurelius succeeded this Roman emperor, his adoptive father. This husband of Faustina the Elder died at age 75 from a fever possibly brought on by bad cheese. Antoninus Pius (or Titus Aurelius Fulvius Boionius Arrius Antoninus) Page 10

1025. This political party was created by the Tamworth Manifesto, which aimed to distinguish it from the Duke of Wellington’s government. A leader of this party gave the Winds of Change speech in South Africa, signaling decolonization that included this party’s suppression of the Mau Mau Rebellion. A leader of this party nicknamed “Milk Snatcher” won a war over the Falklands Islands, and it allied with the DUP in 2016 under Theresa May. For ten points, name this British political party opposed by the Labour Party.
Answer: Conservative Party

1026. Carlo Montu advocated using this technology as a support mechanism rather than en masse. A 1921 book claimed that this technology could be used to incite a revolution among the enemy populace, toppling their government. Giulio Douhet advocated the use of this technology, and originated the maxim that a form of this technology "always gets through." Italy pioneered this technology in a war against Turkey in 1911. For ten points, name this war technology whose early uses included completing reconnaissance missions and dropping grenades onto enemy soldiers.
Answer: air power (or aircraft or airplanes

1027. The Ottoman Empire first conquered this modern-­‐day country by defeating the forces of Tuman Bay II at the Battle of Ridaniya. A Muslim state based in this country was ruled by the Bahri and Burji Dynasties. Muhammad Ali declared himself Khedive of this country under the Ottoman Empire, and established this country’s cotton industry. The capital of the Mamluk Sultanate was in, for ten points, what country that has been ruled from the cities of Fustat and Cairo?
Answer: Egypt

1028. Thomas Willis and Nicolaus Steno independently published groundbreaking texts on these things in the 1660s. Camillo Golgi and Santiago Cajal [ca-­‐HAL] revolutionized the study of these things through their use of a staining procedure. Hippocrates and Aristotle disagreed on the function of this object, the latter believing that they were for cooling blood. Thomas Harvey took this object from Albert Einstein without permission. For ten points, name this body part that is controversially operated on in a lobotomy.
Answer: brains (

1029. Simon Metcalfe massacred inhabitants of this kingdom in Olowalu before his assistants John Young and Isaac Davis went to work for its king. Men and women were forbidden from eating together by this kingdom's kapu system of taboos. This kingdom's founder protected citizens during wartime with the Law of the Splintered Paddle. Lorrin Thurston helped write this kingdom's Bayonet Constitution, and he later overthrew its Queen Liliuokalani. For ten points, name this kingdom that was unified after the conquest of Oahu.
Answer: Kingdom of Hawai’i Page 1

1030. During this conflict, a leader's plans were almost derailed by a charge led by Baldwin de Carron and Garnier de Nablus. Forces captured the Sultanate of Rum's capital during this conflict's Battle of Iconium. Prior to this campaign, Guy of Lusignan was captured at the Battle of Hattin. After the Battle of Arsuf in this crusade, an invasion failed to take Jerusalem. Christians were allowed access to holy places in Jerusalem as a result of, for ten points, what crusade against Saladin led by Richard the Lionheart?
Answer: Third Crusade (“Crusade” not needed after mentioned)

1031. During this war, William Inglis famously urged "Die hard, 57th, die hard!" while lying wounded at the Battle of Albuera. One leader's triumph at the Battle of Vitoria accelerated the end of this war; that leader had built the secret Lines of Torres Vedras as fort chains to defend a territory. The Battle of Salamanca was a major defeat for the forces of Joseph I during this war. A revolt that occurred on May 2, 1808 triggered, for the point, what war between Napoleon and the Spanish and Portuguese?
Answer: Peninsular War (

1032. One of these phenomena, nicknamed the “mud-­‐eater” for its effects on Provence’s agriculture, is known as the mistral. William of Orange’s invasion of England was enabled by a so-­‐called “Protestant” version of this phenomenon, which also destroyed Philip II’s Armada, preventing a Spanish takeover. The Portuguese used the term “volto de mar” to describe their caravels being powered by, for ten points, what meteorological phenomenon that powers sailing ships?
Answer: winds (

1033. Lynn Hunt argues that empathy surrounding this practice led to the formation of human rights. Frederick the Great immediately banned this practice upon assuming the throne, although he kept the decree secret to preserve this practice's deterrent effect. Discipline and Punish opens with an account of Damiens publicly undergoing this practice before his death. A 1764 essay entitled "On Crimes and Punishments" denounces the death penalty and this "irrational" practice. For ten points, name this pain-­‐ inducing practice, often used in interrogations, examples of which include waterboarding.
Answer: torture BONUS: Which US vice president under George W. Bush came under fire for his support of waterboarding and other harsh practices against enemy combatants? Dick Cheney

1034. During this war, Charles Hay’s troops toasted his enemies and asked them to fire first; Maurice de Saxe prevailed over the Duke of Cumberland in that Battle of Fontenoy. Disagreements over whether Charles VI could violate Salic law in proclaiming his heir helped prompt this war, which began when Silesia was invaded by Frederick the Great of Prussia. For ten points, name this 1740 war over Maria Theresa’s succession to a Habsburg throne.
Answer: War of the Austrian Succession Page 2

1035. During this conflict, Henri Huet [en-­‐ree oo-­‐ay] photographed a silhouetted corpse falling out of a helicopter. A sculpture commemorating this war by Frederick Hart shows three soldiers of different ethnicities in U.S. Army and Marine Corps uniforms. That sculpture stands near another commemoration of this war, built after its designer won a contest; that memorial is engraved with over 50,000 names. For ten points, name this war for which Maya Lin built a Veterans Memorial wall.
Answer: Vietnam War BONUS: A photo of Mary Ann Vecchio weeping over a body was taken at an anti-­‐Vietnam War protest at which Ohio university where

1036. This event began when Lucius Cimber presented a petition to return his brother from exile. Security forces failed to reach this event in time, even though Servilius Casca had leaked its details. Outside the Theater of Pompey, this event’s target may have cried “et tu, Brute?” [broo-­‐tay] as he was stabbed. For ten points, name this 44 BC event in which a dictator of Rome was killed.
Answer: assassination (or murder, stabbing, etc.) of Julius Caesar BONUS: Caesar was killed on which specific day in the Roman calendar, which corresponds to our March 15? Ides of March

1037. Jews living under this empire were recruited into cantonist schools and forced to complete years of military service. Menahim Beilis was accused by this empire’s officials of murdering a young boy and dumping his body near a brick factory, as related in Bernard Malamud’s novel The Fixer. The Pale of Settlement was created to house Jews by a female ruler of this empire. For ten points, name this empire which allowed some Jews to serve on the Duma under Nicholas II.
Answer: Russian Empire BONUS: The Pale of

1038. Near the end of this film, a man indicates his support for the main character by wiping the sweat off of his brow using his handkerchief. Lily James portrays a secretary in this film whose primary job is to type dictated letters and speeches. In this film, Viscount Halifax threatens to resign his cabinet position unless the Prime Minister agrees to peace talks with Nazi Germany. For ten points, name this 2017 film set in May 1940, named for a famous speech of Winston Churchill.
Answer: Darkest Hour (do not

1039. The first of these conflicts was triggered by crackdowns against the Gio and Mano ethnic groups. In another of these conflicts, the LURD rebel group shelled the capital until the Accra Peace Agreement was signed. The first of these conflicts led to the capture and murder of Samuel Doe, and the second led to Gyude Bryant leading a transitional government until the election of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Charles Taylor rose to power after the first of these wars and was exiled after the second. For ten points, name this pair of internal conflicts that rocked Monrovia.
Answer: Liberian Civil Wars (

1040. This scientist proved that diamonds are produced of carbon by observing the production of carbon dioxide from a diamond exposed to sunlight. This man, who discovered that respiration is actually a combustion reaction, is considered to have written the first chemistry textbook, his Elementary Treatise on Chemistry; in that book, this man provided names for oxygen and hydrogen. The law of conservation of mass was discovered by, for the point, what "father of modern chemistry," a Frenchman who was guillotined in 1794?
Answer: Antoine Lavoisier BONUS: Lavoisier was the first to show that this substance was elemental, rather than a compound of multiple elements. Charles Goodyear patented the process of vulcanization, the heating of rubber with this element to make it more durable. sulfur (

1041. Disease whose bubonic variety caused the Black Death.
Answer: (black or bubonic) plague

1042. Animals, other than humans, who spread the fleas that carried the disease.
Answer: black rats

1043. Religious group blamed for poisoning wells during the outbreaks, resulting in pogroms.
Answer: Jewish people

1044. Northern European country that was relatively unaffected by the disease, sparing cities like Krakow.
Answer: Poland

1045. Number of humors that medieval doctors believed in, influencing their treatment of victims.
Answer: four humors

1046. Type of mask worn by plague doctors that is now often worn in Carnival celebrations in Venice.
Answer: bird mask (or beak mask

1047. Founder of the Fifth Republic who gave Algeria its independence.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

1048. Egyptian waterway targeted by France, Israel, and Great Britain in a 1956 Crisis.
Answer: Suez Canal (

1049. Colony whose independence movement was led by Ho Chi Minh.
Answer: Vietnam (or French Indochina)

1050. 1954 battle in that colony in which France was defeated by Vo Nguyen Giap.
Answer: Battle of Dien Bien Phu

1051. Emperor who colonized Senegal and less successfully installed Maximilian I in Mexico.
Answer: Napoleon III (do not

1052. Modern African country that was formerly the French Upper Volta colony.
Answer: Burkina Faso Page 6

1053. Continent divided by the Treaty of Tordesillas, which organized Brazilian colonization.
Answer: South America

1054. National language of Brazil, as a result of its European colonization.
Answer: Portuguese

1055. Businessman who established a company town in Brazil to produce rubber for his company’s Model T’s.
Answer: Henry Ford

1056. Practice partially ended by the Law of the Free Womb and fully ended by the Golden Law.
Answer: slavery

1057. Last Emperor of Brazil. He led Brazil to victory in the War of the Triple Alliance.
Answer: Dom Pedro II

1058. This empire's forces once attempted to depose Tigranes [tig-­‐RAH-­‐nays] the Great by invading Armenia. The Arsacid dynasty ruled this empire, whose (+) cavalry perfected a tactic of feigning retreat only to suddenly turn around and launch a storm of arrows, known as its namesake "shot." That tactic was used by this empire's general, Surena, to deal a devastating defeat to the invading armies of (*) Marcus Crassus at the Battle of Carrhae. For ten points, name this ancient Iranian empire that preceded the Sassanids.
Answer: Parthian Empire (

1059. In this region, tunnels painted to look like black anthracite were claimed to be coal mining tunnels rather than invasion routes. This region was the site of a “flagpole war” where countries competed to have taller flags. The Bridge of (+) No Return was used for prisoner exchanges in this region, which includes a (*) Joint Security Area in what was the village of Panmunjom. For ten points, name this region along the 38th parallel that was created in the Armistice of 1953 to separate warring nations on an Asian peninsula.
Answer: Korean Demilitarized Zone (or DMZ

1060. This city declared Jesus Christ its king in the aftermath of the War of the League of Cognac. Luca Pitti called for an armed revolt against Piero the (+) Gouty in this city to avoid paying off his debt. Michele [mik-­‐ay-­‐lay] di Lando was the first leader of a group of angry wool workers in this city during the Revolt of the (*) Ciompi. Sixtus VI said he was unable to sanction, but nevertheless appreciated, the Pazzi conspiracy to depose this city’s ruling family. Lorenzo the Magnificent ruled, for ten points, what Italian city, home to the Medicis?
Answer: Florence (

1061. This man analyzed whether watching a specially-­‐curated episode of the show Medical Center would trigger anti-­‐social behavior in participants. A mind-­‐body thought experiment by this thinker imagines a human being serving as an interlocutor for another’s thoughts; this thinker called those beings (+) “cyranoids.” The trial of Adolf Eichmann inspired another one of this thinker’s experiments, some variants of which were conducted at a nearby warehouse rather than at a (*) Yale laboratory. For ten points, name this social psychologist who encouraged unknowing participants to administer shocks under the orders of an authority figure.
Answer: Stanley Milgram Page 8

1062. One leader of this country was executed by a firing squad commanded by Moises Tshombe; that ruler was deposed after calling in Soviet aid to suppress the secession of its Katanga provinces. (+) Another leader of this country tried to promote “authenticite” by wearing the abacost and renaming his country (*) Zaire. For ten points, name this country once ruled by Patrice Lumumba and Mobutu Sese Seko from Kinshasa.
Answer: Democratic Republic of the Congo (

1063. In this book, a widow symbolically discards her sewing machine into a cement tank full of water in her yard. This book's fifth and final chapter, which was appended forty years after the previous sections, tells of how (+) Father Kleinsorge dies from complications of falling on ice. This book follows the lives of six people as they deal with (*) mysterious red lesions on their skin in the aftermath of a devastating attack on August 6, 1945. For ten points, name this John Hersey book titled after a Japanese city that was hit by an atomic bomb.
Answer: Hiroshima

1064. A key site of fighting during this battle was the Woevre [wheh-­‐vre] plain, where the Germans overran Fort Vaux [voh] after having captured Fort Douaumont with little resistance. Thousands of men and vehicles were shuttled along the (+) Sacred Way to this battle, where Erich von Falkenhayn wanted to inflict the maximum number of casualties on the (*) French. Phillipe Petain’s leadership earned him the epithet “the Lion of,” For ten points, what 1916 battle along the Meuse River, the longest of World War I?
Answer: Battle of Verdun

1065. Louis the Lion was crowned king in this city in 1216, but was forced to vacate it one year later with the Treaty of Lambeth. This city was connected to a nearby settlement by the Strand, as described in the Antonine Itinerary. In 872, The Great (+) Heathen Army wintered in this city before returning to Northumbria. The Witenagemot [vit-­‐eh-­‐neh-­‐geh-­‐mot] crowned (*) Edmund Ironside in this city, which had been used as a capital by his father, Aethelred the Unready. For ten points, name this city on the Thames River, home to a namesake tower built by William the Conqueror.
Answer: London (

1066. This political party was created by the Tamworth Manifesto, which aimed to distinguish it from the Duke of Wellington’s government. A leader of this party gave the Winds of Change speech in South Africa, signaling decolonization that included this party’s suppression of the Mau Mau Rebellion. A leader of this party nicknamed “Milk Snatcher” won a war over the Falklands Islands, and it allied with the DUP in 2016 under Theresa May. For ten points, name this British political party opposed by the Labour Party.
Answer: Conservative Party

1067. Carlo Montu advocated using this technology as a support mechanism rather than en masse. A 1921 book claimed that this technology could be used to incite a revolution among the enemy populace, toppling their government. Giulio Douhet advocated the use of this technology, and originated the maxim that a form of this technology "always gets through." Italy pioneered this technology in a war against Turkey in 1911. For ten points, name this war technology whose early uses included completing reconnaissance missions and dropping grenades onto enemy soldiers.
Answer: air power (or aircraft or airplanes

1068. The Ottoman Empire first conquered this modern-­‐day country by defeating the forces of Tuman Bay II at the Battle of Ridaniya. A Muslim state based in this country was ruled by the Bahri and Burji Dynasties. Muhammad Ali declared himself Khedive of this country under the Ottoman Empire, and established this country’s cotton industry. The capital of the Mamluk Sultanate was in, for ten points, what country that has been ruled from the cities of Fustat and Cairo?
Answer: Egypt

1069. Thomas Willis and Nicolaus Steno independently published groundbreaking texts on these things in the 1660s. Camillo Golgi and Santiago Cajal [ca-­‐HAL] revolutionized the study of these things through their use of a staining procedure. Hippocrates and Aristotle disagreed on the function of this object, the latter believing that they were for cooling blood. Thomas Harvey took this object from Albert Einstein without permission. For ten points, name this body part that is controversially operated on in a lobotomy.
Answer: brains (

1070. Simon Metcalfe massacred inhabitants of this kingdom in Olowalu before his assistants John Young and Isaac Davis went to work for its king. Men and women were forbidden from eating together by this kingdom's kapu system of taboos. This kingdom's founder protected citizens during wartime with the Law of the Splintered Paddle. Lorrin Thurston helped write this kingdom's Bayonet Constitution, and he later overthrew its Queen Liliuokalani. For ten points, name this kingdom that was unified after the conquest of Oahu.
Answer: Kingdom of Hawai’i Page 1

1071. During this conflict, a leader's plans were almost derailed by a charge led by Baldwin de Carron and Garnier de Nablus. Forces captured the Sultanate of Rum's capital during this conflict's Battle of Iconium. Prior to this campaign, Guy of Lusignan was captured at the Battle of Hattin. After the Battle of Arsuf in this crusade, an invasion failed to take Jerusalem. Christians were allowed access to holy places in Jerusalem as a result of, for ten points, what crusade against Saladin led by Richard the Lionheart?
Answer: Third Crusade (“Crusade” not needed after mentioned)

1072. Because Richard Lawrence believed that he held this position, he attempted to assassinate president Andrew Jackson and was thereafter confined to an insane asylum. FDR held a publicized hot dog dinner with the holder of this position in June, 1939. John Dickinson was the primary author of a document addressed to the holder of this position, which urged him to reconsider tax provisions over the American colonies. For ten points, the Olive Branch Petition was addressed to the holder of what position, George III?
Answer: King of England (

1073. During this war, William Inglis famously urged "Die hard, 57th, die hard!" while lying wounded at the Battle of Albuera. One leader's triumph at the Battle of Vitoria accelerated the end of this war; that leader had built the secret Lines of Torres Vedras as fort chains to defend a territory. The Battle of Salamanca was a major defeat for the forces of Joseph I during this war. A revolt that occurred on May 2, 1808 triggered, for the point, what war between Napoleon and the Spanish and Portuguese?
Answer: Peninsular War (

1074. One city in this province became the first Canadian city to host the Winter Olympics in 1988. Another city in this province saw its NHL team win multiple Stanley Cups in the 1980’s, led by Wayne Gretzky, who played for the Oilers. The Canadian Pacific Railroad helped develop this province’s resort cities of Banff and Lake Louise which are home to ski resorts in the Rockies. For ten points, name this western province of Canada, from which it is possible to ski into its western neighbor, British Columbia.
Answer: Alberta

1075. One of these phenomena, nicknamed the “mud-­‐eater” for its effects on Provence’s agriculture, is known as the mistral. William of Orange’s invasion of England was enabled by a so-­‐called “Protestant” version of this phenomenon, which also destroyed Philip II’s Armada, preventing a Spanish takeover. The Portuguese used the term “volto de mar” to describe their caravels being powered by, for ten points, what meteorological phenomenon that powers sailing ships?
Answer: winds (

1076. Lynn Hunt argues that empathy surrounding this practice led to the formation of human rights. Frederick the Great immediately banned this practice upon assuming the throne, although he kept the decree secret to preserve this practice's deterrent effect. Discipline and Punish opens with an account of Damiens publicly undergoing this practice before his death. A 1764 essay entitled "On Crimes and Punishments" denounces the death penalty and this "irrational" practice. For ten points, name this pain-­‐ inducing practice, often used in interrogations, examples of which include waterboarding.
Answer: torture BONUS: Which US vice president under George W. Bush came under fire for his support of waterboarding and other harsh practices against enemy combatants? Dick Cheney

1077. During this war, Charles Hay’s troops toasted his enemies and asked them to fire first; Maurice de Saxe prevailed over the Duke of Cumberland in that Battle of Fontenoy. Disagreements over whether Charles VI could violate Salic law in proclaiming his heir helped prompt this war, which began when Silesia was invaded by Frederick the Great of Prussia. For ten points, name this 1740 war over Maria Theresa’s succession to a Habsburg throne.
Answer: War of the Austrian Succession BONUS: Shortly after the War of the Austrian Succession, the alliances shifted in this event, triggered by

1078. During this conflict, Henri Huet [en-­‐ree oo-­‐ay] photographed a silhouetted corpse falling out of a helicopter. A sculpture commemorating this war by Frederick Hart shows three soldiers of different ethnicities in U.S. Army and Marine Corps uniforms. That sculpture stands near another commemoration of this war, built after its designer won a contest; that memorial is engraved with over 50,000 names. For ten points, name this war for which Maya Lin built a Veterans Memorial wall.
Answer: Vietnam War BONUS: A photo of Mary Ann Vecchio weeping over a body was taken at an anti-­‐Vietnam War protest at which Ohio university where

1079. This event began when Lucius Cimber presented a petition to return his brother from exile. Security forces failed to reach this event in time, even though Servilius Casca had leaked its details. This event triggered the Liberator’s Civil War, in which the perpetrator Cassius was hunted down by the Second Triumvirate. Outside the Theater of Pompey, this event’s target may have cried “et tu, Brute?” [broo-­‐tay] as he was stabbed. For ten points, name this 44 BC event in which a dictator of Rome was killed.
Answer: assassination (or murder, stabbing, etc.) of Julius Caesar Page 3

1080. Jews living under this empire were recruited into cantonist schools and forced to complete years of military service. Menahim Beilis was accused by this empire’s officials of murdering a young boy and dumping his body near a brick factory, as related in Bernard Malamud’s novel The Fixer. The Pale of Settlement was created to house Jews by a female ruler of this empire. For ten points, name this empire which allowed some Jews to serve on the Duma under Nicholas II.
Answer: Russian Empire BONUS: The Pale of

1081. Near the end of this film, a man indicates his support for the main character by wiping the sweat off of his brow using his handkerchief. Lily James portrays a secretary in this film whose primary job is to type dictated letters and speeches. In this film, Viscount Halifax threatens to resign his cabinet position unless the Prime Minister agrees to peace talks with Nazi Germany. For ten points, name this 2017 film set in May 1940, named for a famous speech of Winston Churchill.
Answer: Darkest Hour (do not

1082. The first of these conflicts was triggered by crackdowns against the Gio and Mano ethnic groups. In another of these conflicts, the LURD rebel group shelled the capital until the Accra Peace Agreement was signed. The first of these conflicts led to the capture and murder of Samuel Doe, and the second led to Gyude Bryant leading a transitional government until the election of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Charles Taylor rose to power after the first of these wars and was exiled after the second. For ten points, name this pair of internal conflicts that rocked Monrovia.
Answer: Liberian Civil Wars (

1083. This scientist proved that diamonds are produced of carbon by observing the production of carbon dioxide from a diamond exposed to sunlight. This man, who discovered that respiration is actually a combustion reaction, is considered to have written the first chemistry textbook, his Elementary Treatise on Chemistry; in that book, this man provided names for oxygen and hydrogen. The law of conservation of mass was discovered by, for the point, what "father of modern chemistry," a Frenchman who was guillotined in 1794?
Answer: Antoine Lavoisier BONUS: Lavoisier was the first to show that this substance was elemental, rather than a compound of multiple elements. Charles Goodyear patented the process of vulcanization, the heating of rubber with this element to make it more durable. sulfur (

1084. Disease whose bubonic variety caused the Black Death.
Answer: (black or bubonic) plague

1085. Animals, other than humans, who spread the fleas that carried the disease.
Answer: black rats

1086. Religious group blamed for poisoning wells during the outbreaks, resulting in pogroms.
Answer: Jewish people

1087. Northern European country that was relatively unaffected by the disease, sparing cities like Krakow.
Answer: Poland

1088. Number of humors that medieval doctors believed in, influencing their treatment of victims.
Answer: four humors

1089. Type of mask worn by plague doctors that is now often worn in Carnival celebrations in Venice.
Answer: bird mask (or beak mask

1090. British monarch who won the Battle of Crecy and instituted the Statue of Laborers to deal with the depopulation caused by the Black Death.
Answer: Edward III (

1091. Sea by which the disease first entered Europe at the port of Kaffa.
Answer: Black Sea Page 6

1092. Founder of the Fifth Republic who gave Algeria its independence.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

1093. Egyptian waterway targeted by France, Israel, and Great Britain in a 1956 Crisis.
Answer: Suez Canal (

1094. Colony whose independence movement was led by Ho Chi Minh.
Answer: Vietnam (or French Indochina)

1095. 1954 battle in that colony in which France was defeated by Vo Nguyen Giap.
Answer: Battle of Dien Bien Phu

1096. Emperor who colonized Senegal and less successfully installed Maximilian I in Mexico.
Answer: Napoleon III (do not

1097. Modern African country that was formerly the French Upper Volta colony.
Answer: Burkina Faso

1098. Former French colony that faced a Tuareg rebellion aiming to establish the state of Azawad.
Answer: Mali

1099. Colonial border crisis in 1898 in which British and French troops stood off in Sudan.
Answer: Fashoda incident (or crisis, etc.) Page 7

1100. Continent divided by the Treaty of Tordesillas, which organized Brazilian colonization.
Answer: South America

1101. National language of Brazil, as a result of its European colonization.
Answer: Portuguese

1102. Businessman who established a company town in Brazil to produce rubber for his company’s Model T’s
Answer: Henry Ford

1103. Practice partially ended by the Law of the Free Womb and fully ended by the Golden Law.
Answer: slavery

1104. Last Emperor of Brazil. He led Brazil to victory in the War of the Triple Alliance.
Answer: Dom Pedro II

1105. Substance that, with milk, names a period of rule by landowners in Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais.
Answer: coffee (or cafe

1106. Leader who established Brazil’s Estado Novo regime in 1930.
Answer: Getulio Vargas

1107. This empire's forces once attempted to depose Tigranes [tig-­‐RAH-­‐nays] the Great by invading Armenia. The Arsacid dynasty ruled this empire, whose (+) cavalry perfected a tactic of feigning retreat only to suddenly turn around and launch a storm of arrows, known as its namesake "shot." That tactic was used by this empire's general, Surena, to deal a devastating defeat to the invading armies of (*) Marcus Crassus at the Battle of Carrhae. For ten points, name this ancient Iranian empire that preceded the Sassanids.
Answer: Parthian Empire (

1108. In this region, tunnels painted to look like black anthracite were claimed to be coal mining tunnels rather than invasion routes. This region was the site of a “flagpole war” where countries competed to have taller flags. The Bridge of (+) No Return was used for prisoner exchanges in this region, which includes a (*) Joint Security Area in what was the village of Panmunjom. For ten points, name this region along the 38th parallel that was created in the Armistice of 1953 to separate warring nations on an Asian peninsula.
Answer: Korean Demilitarized Zone (or DMZ

1109. This city declared Jesus Christ its king in the aftermath of the War of the League of Cognac. Luca Pitti called for an armed revolt against Piero the (+) Gouty in this city to avoid paying off his debt. Michele [mik-­‐ay-­‐lay] di Lando was the first leader of a group of angry wool workers in this city during the Revolt of the (*) Ciompi. Sixtus VI said he was unable to sanction, but nevertheless appreciated, the Pazzi conspiracy to depose this city’s ruling family. Lorenzo the Magnificent ruled, for ten points, what Italian city, home to the Medicis?
Answer: Florence (

1110. This man analyzed whether watching a specially-­‐curated episode of the show Medical Center would trigger anti-­‐social behavior in participants. A mind-­‐body thought experiment by this thinker imagines a human being serving as an interlocutor for another’s thoughts; this thinker called those beings (+) “cyranoids.” The trial of Adolf Eichmann inspired another one of this thinker’s experiments, some variants of which were conducted at a nearby warehouse rather than at a (*) Yale laboratory. For ten points, name this social psychologist who encouraged unknowing participants to administer shocks under the orders of an authority figure.
Answer: Stanley Milgram Page 9

1111. A leader of this nation was militarily supported by the Safari Club in fighting the first Shaba conflict. Another leader of this country was executed by a firing squad commanded by Moises (+) Tshombe; that ruler was deposed after calling in Soviet aid to suppress the secession of its Katanga provinces. Another leader of this country tried to promote (*) “authenticite” by wearing the abacost and renaming his country Zaire. For ten points, name this country once ruled by Patrice Lumumba and Mobutu Sese Seko from Kinshasa.
Answer: Democratic Republic of the Congo (

1112. In this novel, a widow symbolically discards her sewing machine into a cement tank full of water in her yard. This book's fifth and final chapter, which was appended forty years after the previous sections, tells of how (+) Father Kleinsorge dies from complications of falling on ice. This book follows the lives of six people as they deal with (*) mysterious red lesions on their skin in the aftermath of a devastating attack on August 6, 1945. For ten points, name this John Hersey book titled after a Japanese city that was hit by an atomic bomb.
Answer: Hiroshima

1113. A key site of fighting during this battle was the Woevre [wheh-­‐vre] plain, where the Germans overran Fort Vaux [voh] after having captured Fort Douaumont with little resistance. Thousands of men and vehicles were shuttled along the (+) Sacred Way to this battle, where Erich von Falkenhayn wanted to inflict the maximum number of casualties on the (*) French. Phillipe Petain’s leadership earned him the epithet “the Lion of,” For ten points, what 1916 battle along the Meuse River, the longest of World War I?
Answer: Battle of Verdun

1114. Louis the Lion was crowned king in this city in 1216, but was forced to vacate it one year later with the Treaty of Lambeth. This city was connected to a nearby settlement by the Strand, as described in the Antonine Itinerary. In 872, The Great (+) Heathen Army wintered in this city before returning to Northumbria. The Witenagemot [vit-­‐eh-­‐neh-­‐geh-­‐mot] crowned (*) Edmund Ironside in this city, which had been used as a capital by his father, Aethelred the Unready. For ten points, name this city on the Thames River, home to a namesake tower built by William the Conqueror.
Answer: London (

1115. This settlement was abandoned after the loss of a trade network centered on Kilwa, leading its inhabitants to settle Mutapa. Sites at this settlement include the Great Enclosure and the Hill Complex, where eight birds carved of soapstone were once supposed to have stood. It was constructed by the Shona people, who protected themselves with high walls built without mortar. For ten points, name this Iron Age settlement that lends its name to an African country with capital Harare.
Answer: Great Zimbabwe (

1116. This country attempted to recreate a Six Day War strategy by launching Operation Chengiz Khan, disabling a rival's air force in retaliation for their support of Mukti Bahini. Under Yahya Khan, this country launched Operation Searchlight to suppress the Awami League, a nationalist movement in a breakaway state. This country fought the Kargil War and frequently contests the region of Kashmir with its eastern neighbor. Bangladesh gained its independence from, for ten points, what northwestern neighbor of India?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

1117. A treaty with this name included the secret Act of Seclusion, by which the future William III lost the title of Stadtholder. The first and third Anglo-­‐Dutch Wars were ended by treaties of this name. A 1931 statute of this name established protocols between the U.K. and dominion realms. A religious building with this name was built on the orders of Edward the Confessor and was the site of his burial. For ten points, give the name shared by the abbey where British monarchs are coronated.
Answer: Westminster (

1118. One of these ships was deemed too slow for the Pacific Theatre and was used in Operation Leader in Norway. During Operation Torch, one of these ships supported ground troops and was named Ranger. In order to prevent the capture of Port Moresby by Japan, two of these ships were sent to the Coral Sea, leading to the scuttling of one called the Lexington. These ships were not present during the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Yorktown was, for ten points, what type of ship that provides a runway for warplanes?
Answer: aircraft carriers

1119. Excavation efforts by Hormuzd Rassam located the contents of these buildings in the temple of Samas in Sippar. Another of these buildings housed two huge statues of Dagon and two rooms called "houses of the rolls;" that building of this type was allegedly visited by Alexander the Great. A palace in Nineveh was home to one of these buildings built by Ashurbanipal that contained thousands of cuneiform tablets. For ten points, name this type of location where the Epic of Gilgamesh and other literary works may have been stored.
Answer: (Mesopotamian) library Page 1

1120. This man was placed under house arrest after an outpouring of grief on Tomb-­‐Sweeping Day; that came during a period of turmoil in which this man’s son was thrown out of a fourth-­‐story window. This man, who succeeded the proponent of the “Two Whatevers,” Hua Guofeng [hwa gwo-­‐fun], established Special Economic Zones as part of a philosophy that he summarized as “It doesn’t matter whether a cat is white or black, as long as it catches mice.” For ten points, name this “paramount leader” of China from 1978 to 1992 who began the country’s market reforms.
Answer: Deng Xiaoping [“done” shao-­‐ping]

1121. At this location, a torpedo attack caused the Pallada to keel over during fighting that one side initially thought was part of the celebrations for Admiral Oskar Stark's wife. Despite that confusion, the surprise attack at this location was only able to disable two battleships, the Retvizan and Tsarevich. The Poltava was sunk at a battle at this location on the southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula. For ten points, name this Manchurian port that was besieged during the Russo-­‐Japanese War.
Answer: Port Arthur (

1122. While serving as consul, a man of this name oversaw the debate over the Oppian Law restricting the amount of wealth a woman could own, as well as two Porcian Laws protecting citizens from severe punishment. A man with this name opposed Julius Caesar and once forced him to choose a consulship over a triumph. The elder statesman of this name got his wish in the Third Punic War when Scipio Africanus razed a city that legendarily had salt sowed in its soil. For ten points, give this name shared by a censor of Rome who repeated at the end of his speeches, “Carthage must be destroyed.”
Answer: Cato (

1123. This artist included a depiction of Sappho holding a scroll with her name on it, as well as Dante, Boccacio, and the nine muses in a depiction of Mount Parnassus. This artist, who began his career under Perugino, included a self-­‐portrait as the Greek painter Apelles in one of his four frescoes for the Stanza della Segnatura, commissioned by Pope Julius II. For ten points, name this Italian painter who painted Plato and Aristotle conversing in his The School of Athens.
Answer: Raphael (

1124. A ruler in this modern-­‐day nation sided with Naples in the Treaty of Gaeta and formed the League of Lezhë. Ismail Qemali [ish-­‐mail kem-­‐ah-­‐lee] helped this nation gain independence at the Assembly of Vlorë [v'lor-­‐uh]. In the 15th century, a historical region that became this nation fought off the Ottomans with the help of Skanderbeg. For ten points, name this Balkan nation that Enver Hoxha [hoh-­‐cha] governed from its capital, Tirana.
Answer: Albania BONUS: In

1125. This politician’s attempt in mid-­‐2017 to suppress the Maute [mao-­‐tay] group led to a protracted siege of the city of Marawi. This man, who chaired the most recent ASEAN summit, attracted controversy in 2016 for comments surrounding the rape of the Australian missionary Jacqueline Hamill. Time Magazine labeled this man as “The Punisher” in response to his use of extrajudicial “death squads” against drug dealers. For ten points, name this current president of the Philippines.
Answer: Rodrigo Roa Duterte BONUS: Prior to serving as President, Duterte [doo-­‐tare-­‐tay] served as mayor of this Philippine city on the island of Mindanao. Davao City

1126. This object is displayed prominently on the Mykonos Vase. A story about this object relates how Anticlus was tempted to call out to his wife when a woman impersonated her voice. Epeius supervised the construction of this object, which was presented by Sinon as an offering to Athena from an army that had abandoned their cause. Odysseus and forty of his warriors hid inside, for ten points, what wooden animal that was dragged inside the walls of Troy?
Answer: Trojan Horse BONUS: This male prophet’s calls to “Beware of Greeks bearing gifts” was ignored by the Trojans prior to accepting the horse. In most traditions, this man was killed along with his two sons by sea serpents. Laocoon

1127. A scandal involving illegal shipments of arms to this country involved Charles Pasqua, Jean-­‐ Christophe Mitterand, and several French writers and artists. The Bicesse Accord set up a plan for democracy in this country with the support of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos. In 1992, fighting in this country intensified in the Halloween Massacre between the ruling party once backed by Cuban military aid, the MPLA, and the opposition UNITA party. For ten points, name this former Portuguese colony that is governed from Luanda.
Answer: Angola BONUS: Portugal also was the main colonial power in which other country consisting of two namesake islands off the Atlantic coast of Africa? Sao Tome and Principe Page 3

1128. This invention is believed to have been first created by the Swedish army officer D.H. Fridberg, who produced the “Kjellman” [k’yell-­‐man] version. Later versions of this device were manufactured by Hotchkiss and Vickers. Hiram Maxim perfected the first practical form of this weapon, which was used to sustained, deadly effect in No Man’s Land during World War I. John Browning also designed, for ten points, what fully automatic weapons that often use a belt feeder and a bipod stand?
Answer: machine gun BONUS: Machine guns were used to mow down Bugs Moran’s men in the St. Valentine’s Day massacre, which was likely ordered by Al Capone in what US city? Chicago

1129. Before the recognition of these objects as important artifacts in 1899, many of them were ground into dust and used as a cure for malaria. A sixty day cycle using the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches was used to record data from these objects. Heated metal rods were used to crack these objects, on which questions were written. For ten points, name these objects that were used as divination tools used by Shang dynasty oracles whose common examples included ox scapulas.
Answer: oracle bones (

1130. A civil war of these people resulted in John of Giscala massacring Ananus’ followers. To win a battle against these people, government forces rolled a siege tower up a dirt ramp to avoid traversing the well-­‐defended “snake road.” Shortly after he was victorious at the siege of Yodfat, Vespasian hired one of these people, Josephus, as his biographer. A faction of these people committed mass suicide atop Masada fortress rather than surrender, leading them to be known as the Zealots. For ten points, name this religious group that tried to expel the Romans from Jerusalem.
Answer: Jewish people (

1131. Modern country where the Anglo-­‐Zulu War primarily took place.
Answer: South Africa

1132. Zulu king who greatly expanded the empire before being murdered by his half brother, Dingane.
Answer: Shaka Zulu (or Shaka kaSenzangakhona)

1133. Century in which the British Empire and Zulu kingdom clashed in the Angl0-­‐Zulu War
Answer: 19th (or

1134. European-­‐descended ethnic group who clashed with the Zulu before fighting the British in their own war some decades later
Answer: Boers or Afrikaaners (

1135. Massive British defeat that opened the Anglo-­‐Zulu War.
Answer: Battle of Isandlwana

1136. Ensuing British victory in which a garrison of 150 British troops defeated several thousand Zulu attackers.
Answer: Battle of Rorke's Drift Page 5

1137. Long race named in honor of a 490 BC Greek victory over Persia.
Answer: Marathon (

1138. Greek kingdom ruled by the conquerors Alexander the Great and his father, Philip II.
Answer: Macedonia

1139. Military formation of troops and hoplites armed with spears and shields, the basic infantry unit in ancient Greece.
Answer: phalanx

1140. Type of victory in which the winning side endures unsustainable casualties, named after an ancient commander who won at Asculum and Heraclea.
Answer: Pyrrhic Victory (

1141. Greek city state whose army, including the Sacred Band, executed one of the first flanking maneuvers over Sparta at the Battle of Leuctra [look-­‐tra].
Answer: Thebes

1142. Type of ship that formed the bulk of the Athenian navy, named for its three rows of oars.
Answer: trireme Page 6

1143. Country whose Indian territories were annexed after the Seven Years War; its East India Company was founded by Jean-­‐Baptiste Colbert
Answer: Kingdom of France

1144. Nonviolent leader who protested British rule with a salt march to Dandi.
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (or Mahatma Gandhi)

1145. Region where the British conquest of India began; the region around its namesake bay is divided between India and Bangladesh
Answer: Bengal (

1146. 1857 mutiny of native Indian soldiers that ended company rule in India.
Answer: Sepoy Mutiny (or Uprising, Revolt, etc.)

1147. 1756 incident in which several British East India Company employees died in a crowded prison cell.
Answer: Black Hole of Calcutta

1148. City where Reginald Dyer’s men fired into a crowd of pilgrims in 1919, killing hundreds.
Answer: Amritsar Page 7

1149. The winner of this war demanded the Tarapaca Province at the Lackawanna Conference. During this war, captain Miguel Grau sank the Esmerelda at the Battle of Iquique, but lost his ironclad (+) Huascar at the Battle of Angamos. This war, which began over a tax dispute near Antofagasta, was ended by the Treaty of Ancon. (*) For ten points, name this South American war that pitted Peru and Bolivia against Chile over mineral reserves in the late 19th century.
Answer: War of the Pacific (or Guerra del Pacifico

1150. A device that relies on this effect called an h/e apparatus can be used to experimentally determine Planck’s constant. This effect was discovered after an observation that illumination with UV light made electrodes produce (+) sparks more easily. As the theories of relativity were still controversial in 1921, the Nobel committee emphasized the discovery of this effect in (*) Albert Einstein’s citation. For ten points, name this effect in which high-­‐energy photons dislodge electrons from a metal.
Answer: photoelectric effect

1151. Eleazar Miller oversaw a famous one of these events near a mill. Manteo was the first Native American to undergo one version of this process. Kateri Tekakwitha underwent this process at the hands of the French, leading the (+) Mohawk to accuse her of witchcraft. The Nauvoo Temple contains a place where individuals can conduct this process on the (*) dead, an act allowed by the Mormon church. For ten points, name this sacramental process in which Christians immerse themselves in water.
Answer: baptism (

1152. In the aftermath of this battle, one side established the Stanley Internment Camp and brutally tortured Mateen Ansari. St. Stephen’s College, a makeshift hospital, was the site of a massacre during this battle in which wounded soldiers were (+) bayoneted in their beds. After 17 days of fighting, this battle ended when Governor Mark (*) Young personally surrendered on “Black Christmas.” For ten points, name this 1941 battle in which Japanese forces captured a British city on the Pearl River.
Answer: Battle of Hong Kong (

1153. This country arrested hundreds of “Swing Kids,” who preferred English language music. The opera Jonny Strikes Up by Ernst Krenek was criticized in a music exhibition in this country, which commissioned (+) Carl Orff to write incidental music for Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream to replace Felix (*) Mendelssohn’s work. Jazz and twelve-­‐tone music were banned as “degenerate music” by, for ten points, what country from which Arnold Schoenberg and other Jewish composers fled in the 1930s?
Answer: Nazi Germany (

1154. Two answers required. An intervention in a war between these two countries was the subject of the Simla Manifesto, promising to restore Shah Shuja. Louis Cavagnari served as a diplomat from one of these two countries to the other but was killed in riots after the 1879 Treaty of (+) Gandamak paused a war between these two countries; after those riots, Abdur Rahman Khan was installed as Emir. One of these countries imposed the (*) Durand Line on the other as its border with modern Pakistan. For ten points, name these two countries that fought three wars in the 19th and 20th centuries, the last of which ended with a European power vacating Kabul.
Answer: Emirate of Afghanistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

1155. This author wrote about a young couple who commit suicide after the failure of an uprising in late February in his story “Patriotism.” This author’s death (+) poem, which declares that “failing is the essence of a flower,” was composed in preparation for his takeover of an army outpost. (*) The Temple of the Golden Pavilion was written by, for ten points, what Japanese author who completed his The Sea of Fertility series before his ritual suicide, or seppuku, after the failure of an imperialist coup in 1970?
Answer: Yukio Mishima (or Kimitake Hiraoka

1156. This ruler employed the sculptor Bek, and the blocks used for construction during this ruler's reign were known as talatats. This man's correspondence with Tushratta, king of the Mittani, discussed his marriage with Tadukhipa; those (+) letters were recovered by Jorgen Alexander Knudtzon on clay tablets at Amarna. Thutmose sculpted a bust of this man's wife, (*) Nefertiti, and this ruler was succeeded by his supposed son, Smenkhkare. For ten points, name this father of Tutankhamen, a pharaoh who venerated the sun disc Aten.
Answer: Akhenaten (or Amenhotep IV

1157. A British monarch of this name signed the Treaty of Alton with his brother Robert, though he later broke the peace by invading Normandy and winning the Battle of Tinchebray. The third British king of this name was opposed by (+) Simon de Montfort, who forced him to sign the Provisions of Oxford. This was the name of the British ruler who married (*) Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152. For ten points, give this British royal name, also shared by a king who feuded with Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Becket.
Answer: Henry (

1158. This settlement was abandoned after the loss of a trade network centered on Kilwa, leading its inhabitants to settle Mutapa. Sites at this settlement include the Great Enclosure and the Hill Complex, where eight birds carved of soapstone were once supposed to have stood. It was constructed by the Shona people, who protected themselves with high walls built without mortar. For ten points, name this Iron Age settlement that lends its name to an African country with capital Harare.
Answer: Great Zimbabwe (

1159. This country attempted to recreate a Six Day War strategy by launching Operation Chengiz Khan, disabling a rival's air force in retaliation for their support of Mukti Bahini. Under Yahya Khan, this country launched Operation Searchlight to suppress the Awami League, a nationalist movement in a breakaway state. This country fought the Kargil War and frequently contests the region of Kashmir with its eastern neighbor. Bangladesh gained its independence from, for ten points, what northwestern neighbor of India?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

1160. A treaty with this name included the secret Act of Seclusion, by which the future William III lost the title of Stadtholder. The first and third Anglo-­‐Dutch Wars were ended by treaties of this name. A 1931 statute of this name established protocols between the U.K. and dominion realms. A religious building with this name was built on the orders of Edward the Confessor and was the site of his burial. For ten points, give the name shared by the abbey where British monarchs are coronated.
Answer: Westminster (

1161. One of these ships was deemed too slow for the Pacific Theatre and was used in Operation Leader in Norway. During Operation Torch, one of these ships supported ground troops and was named Ranger. In order to prevent the capture of Port Moresby by Japan, two of these ships were sent to the Coral Sea, leading to the scuttling of one called the Lexington. These ships were not present during the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Yorktown was, for ten points, what type of ship that provides a runway for warplanes?
Answer: aircraft carriers

1162. This man publicly debated Michel Foucault [foo-­‐koh] in a TV program titled Human Nature: Justice versus Power. This man defended the right of a Holocaust denier to publish in the Faurisson affair. This thinker, who worked with Edward Herman on a book critical of the Vietnam War, coined the nonsense phrase “colorless green ideas sleep furiously” to illustrate the difference between grammar and syntax. For ten points, name this outspoken MIT professor, often considered the father of modern linguistics.
Answer: (Avram) Noam Chomsky Page 1

1163. Excavation efforts by Hormuzd Rassam located the contents of these buildings in the temple of Samas in Sippar. Another of these buildings housed two huge statues of Dagon and two rooms called "houses of the rolls;" that building of this type was allegedly visited by Alexander the Great. A palace in Nineveh was home to one of these buildings built by Ashurbanipal that contained thousands of cuneiform tablets. For ten points, name this type of location where the Epic of Gilgamesh and other literary works may have been stored.
Answer: (Mesopotamian) library

1164. This man was placed under house arrest after an outpouring of grief on Tomb-­‐Sweeping Day; that came during a period of turmoil in which this man’s son was thrown out of a fourth-­‐story window. This man, who succeeded the proponent of the “Two Whatevers,” Hua Guofeng [hwa gwo-­‐fun], established Special Economic Zones as part of a philosophy that he summarized as “It doesn’t matter whether a cat is white or black, as long as it catches mice.” For ten points, name this “paramount leader” of China from 1978 to 1992 who began the country’s market reforms.
Answer: Deng Xiaoping [“done” shao-­‐ping]

1165. At this location, a torpedo attack caused the Pallada to keel over during fighting that one side initially thought was part of the celebrations for Admiral Oskar Stark's wife. Despite that confusion, the surprise attack at this location was only able to disable two battleships, the Retvizan and Tsarevich. The Poltava was sunk at a battle at this location on the southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula. For ten points, name this Manchurian port that was besieged during the Russo-­‐Japanese War.
Answer: Port Arthur (

1166. While serving as consul, a man of this name oversaw the debate over the Oppian Law restricting the amount of wealth a woman could own, as well as two Porcian Laws protecting citizens from severe punishment. A man with this name opposed Julius Caesar and once forced him to choose a consulship over a triumph. The elder statesman of this name got his wish in the Third Punic War when Scipio Africanus razed a city that legendarily had salt sowed in its soil. For ten points, give this name shared by a censor of Rome who repeated at the end of his speeches, “Carthage must be destroyed.”
Answer: Cato (

1167. This empire was founded by As-­‐Saffah shortly after a military victory at the Zab River. Under Al-­‐ Mansur, this empire sent four thousand mercenaries to help put down the An Lushan Rebellion. This empire ceded power to the Seljuks in the 11th century and was eventually destroyed by Hulagu Khan's Mongol armies. Harun al-­‐Rashid, a ruler of this empire, established the House of Wisdom in its capital of Baghdad. For ten points, name this successor to the Umayyad Caliphate that oversaw the Islamic Golden Age.
Answer: Abbasid Caliphate Page 2

1168. A ruler in this modern-­‐day nation sided with Naples in the Treaty of Gaeta and formed the League of Lezhë. Ismail Qemali [ish-­‐mail kem-­‐ah-­‐lee] helped this nation gain independence at the Assembly of Vlorë [v'lor-­‐uh]. In the 15th century, a historical region that became this nation fought off the Ottomans with the help of Skanderbeg. For ten points, name this Balkan nation that Enver Hoxha [hoh-­‐cha] governed from its capital, Tirana.
Answer: Albania BONUS: In

1169. This politician’s attempt in mid-­‐2017 to suppress the Maute [mao-­‐tay] group led to a protracted siege of the city of Marawi. This man, who chaired the most recent ASEAN summit, attracted controversy in 2016 for comments surrounding the rape of the Australian missionary Jacqueline Hamill. Time Magazine labeled this man as “The Punisher” in response to his use of extrajudicial “death squads” against drug dealers. For ten points, name this current president of the Philippines.
Answer: Rodrigo Roa Duterte BONUS: Prior to serving as President, Duterte [doo-­‐tare-­‐tay] served as mayor of this Philippine city on the island of Mindanao. Davao City

1170. This object is displayed prominently on the Mykonos Vase. A story about this object relates how Anticlus was tempted to call out to his wife when a woman impersonated her voice. Epeius supervised the construction of this object, which was presented by Sinon as an offering to Athena from an army that had abandoned their cause. Odysseus and forty of his warriors hid inside, for ten points, what wooden animal that was dragged inside the walls of Troy?
Answer: Trojan Horse BONUS: This male prophet’s calls to “Beware of Greeks bearing gifts” was ignored by the Trojans prior to accepting the horse. In most traditions, this man was killed along with his two sons by sea serpents. Laocoon Page 3

1171. A scandal involving illegal shipments of arms to this country involved Charles Pasqua, Jean-­‐ Christophe Mitterand, and several French writers and artists. The Bicesse Accord set up a plan for democracy in this country with the support of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos. In 1992, fighting in this country intensified in the Halloween Massacre between the ruling party once backed by Cuban military aid, the MPLA, and the opposition UNITA party. For ten points, name this former Portuguese colony that is governed from Luanda.
Answer: Angola BONUS: During the Angolan Civil War, the FLEC groups fought for the independence of this Angolan exclave, which is separated from Angola by a strip of DRC territory. Cabinda Province

1172. This invention is believed to have been first created by the Swedish army officer D.H. Fridberg, who produced the “Kjellman” [k’yell-­‐man] version. Later versions of this device were manufactured by Hotchkiss and Vickers. Hiram Maxim perfected the first practical form of this weapon, which was used to sustained, deadly effect in No Man’s Land during World War I. John Browning also designed, for ten points, what fully automatic weapons that often use a belt feeder and a bipod stand?
Answer: machine gun BONUS: During World War I, this German airplane manufacturer invented the gun synchronizer to prevent machine guns mounted on fighters from firing bullets into the propellers. Fokker Aviatik GmBH (

1173. Before the recognition of these objects as important artifacts in 1899, many of them were ground into dust and used as a cure for malaria. A sixty day cycle using the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches was used to record data from these objects. Heated metal rods were used to crack these objects, on which questions were written. For ten points, name these objects that were used as divination tools used by Shang dynasty oracles whose common examples included ox scapulas.
Answer: oracle bones (

1174. A civil war of these people resulted in John of Giscala massacring Ananus’ followers. To win a battle against these people, government forces rolled a siege tower up a dirt ramp to avoid traversing the well-­‐defended “snake road.” Shortly after he was victorious at the siege of Yodfat, Vespasian hired one of these people, Josephus, as his biographer. A faction of these people committed mass suicide atop Masada fortress rather than surrender, leading them to be known as the Zealots. For ten points, name this religious group that tried to expel the Romans from Jerusalem.
Answer: Jewish people (

1175. Modern country where the Anglo-­‐Zulu War took place.
Answer: South Africa

1176. Zulu king who greatly expanded the empire before being murdered by his half brother, Dingane.
Answer: Shaka Zulu (or Shaka kaSenzangakhona)

1177. Century in which the British Empire and Zulu kingdom clashed in the Angl0-­‐Zulu War
Answer: 19th (or

1178. European-­‐descended ethnic group who clashed with the Zulu before fighting the British in their own war some decades later
Answer: Boers or Afrikaaners (

1179. Massive British defeat that opened the Anglo-­‐Zulu War.
Answer: Battle of Isandlwana

1180. Ensuing British victory in which a garrison of 150 British troops defeated several thousand Zulu attackers.
Answer: Battle of Rorke's Drift

1181. Decisive British victory at the Zulu capital, the last major battle of the war.
Answer: Battle of Ulundi

1182. Zulu king during the Anglo-­‐Zulu War, during which he armed the impi with muskets.
Answer: Cetshwayo kaMpande Page 6

1183. Long race named in honor of a 490 BC Greek victory over Persia.
Answer: Marathon (

1184. Greek kingdom ruled by the conquerors Alexander the Great and his father, Philip II.
Answer: Macedonia

1185. Military formation of troops and hoplites armed with spears and shields, the basic infantry unit in ancient Greece.
Answer: phalanx

1186. Type of victory in which the winning side endures unsustainable casualties, named after an ancient commander who won at Asculum and Heraclea.
Answer: Pyrrhic Victory (

1187. Type of ship that formed the bulk of the Athenian navy, named for its three rows of oars.
Answer: trireme

1188. Greek city state whose army, including the Sacred Band, executed one of the first flanking maneuvers over Sparta at the Battle of Leuctra [look-­‐tra].
Answer: Thebes

1189. Commander who won the battles of Leuctra and Mantinea [man-­‐ti-­‐nay-­‐uh].
Answer: Epaminondas

1190. Long, pike-­‐like spear introduced by Philip II to replace the dory in his armies.
Answer: sarissa Page 7

1191. Country whose Indian territories were annexed after the Seven Years War; its East India Company was founded by Jean-­‐Baptiste Colbert
Answer: Kingdom of France

1192. Nonviolent leader who protested British rule with a salt march to Dandi.
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (or Mahatma Gandhi)

1193. Region where the British conquest of India began; the region around its namesake bay is divided between India and Bangladesh
Answer: Bengal (

1194. 1857 mutiny of native Indian soldiers that ended company rule in India.
Answer: Sepoy Mutiny (or Uprising, Revolt, etc.)

1195. 1756 incident in which several British East India Company employees died in a crowded prison cell.
Answer: Black Hole of Calcutta

1196. City where Reginald Dyer’s men fired into a crowd of pilgrims in 1919, killing hundreds.
Answer: Amritsar

1197. Rocket-­‐loving Indian state ruled by Tipu Sultan and conquered by the British in the 19th century.
Answer: Mysore

1198. Doctrine that allowed Britain to take control of princely states whose rulers had no male heir.
Answer: Doctrine of Lapse Page 8

1199. The winner of this war demanded the Tarapaca Province at the Lackawanna Conference. During this war, captain Miguel Grau sank the Esmerelda at the Battle of Iquique, but lost his ironclad (+) Huascar at the Battle of Angamos. This war, which began over a tax dispute near Antofagasta, was ended by the Treaty of Ancon. (*) For ten points, name this South American war that pitted Peru and Bolivia against Chile over mineral reserves in the late 19th century.
Answer: War of the Pacific (or Guerra del Pacifico

1200. A device that relies on this effect called an h/e apparatus can be used to experimentally determine Planck’s constant. This effect was discovered after an observation that illumination with UV light made electrodes produce (+) sparks more easily. As the theories of relativity were still controversial in 1921, the Nobel committee emphasized the discovery of this effect in (*) Albert Einstein’s citation. For ten points, name this effect in which high-­‐energy photons dislodge electrons from a metal.
Answer: photoelectric effect

1201. Eleazar Miller oversaw a famous one of these events near a mill. Manteo was the first Native American to undergo one version of this process. Kateri Tekakwitha underwent this process at the hands of the French, leading the (+) Mohawk to accuse her of witchcraft. The Nauvoo Temple contains a place where individuals can conduct this process on the (*) dead, an act allowed by the Mormon church. For ten points, name this sacramental process in which Christians immerse themselves in water.
Answer: baptism (

1202. In the aftermath of this battle, one side established the Stanley Internment Camp and brutally tortured Mateen Ansari. St. Stephen’s College, a makeshift hospital, was the site of a massacre during this battle in which wounded soldiers were (+) bayoneted in their beds. After 17 days of fighting, this battle ended when Governor Mark (*) Young personally surrendered on “Black Christmas.” For ten points, name this 1941 battle in which Japanese forces captured a British city on the Pearl River.
Answer: Battle of Hong Kong (

1203. This country arrested hundreds of “Swing Kids,” who preferred English language music. The opera Jonny Strikes Up by Ernst Krenek was criticized in a music exhibition in this country, which commissioned (+) Carl Orff to write incidental music for Shakespeare’s Midsummer Night’s Dream to replace Felix (*) Mendelssohn’s work. Jazz and twelve-­‐tone music were banned as “degenerate music” by, for ten points, what country from which Arnold Schoenberg and other Jewish composers fled in the 1930s?
Answer: Nazi Germany (

1204. Two answers required. An intervention in a war between these two countries was the subject of the Simla Manifesto, promising to restore Shah Shuja. Louis Cavagnari served as a diplomat from one of these two countries to the other but was killed in riots after the 1879 Treaty of (+) Gandamak paused a war between these two countries; after those riots, Abdur Rahman Khan was installed as Emir. One of these countries imposed the (*) Durand Line on the other as its border with modern Pakistan. For ten points, name these two countries that fought three wars in the 19th and 20th centuries, the last of which ended with a European power vacating Kabul.
Answer: Emirate of Afghanistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

1205. This author wrote about a young couple who commit suicide after the failure of an uprising in late February in his story “Patriotism.” This author’s death (+) poem, which declares that “failing is the essence of a flower,” was composed in preparation for his takeover of an army outpost. (*) The Temple of the Golden Pavilion was written by, for ten points, what Japanese author who completed his The Sea of Fertility series before his ritual suicide, or seppuku, after the failure of an imperialist coup in 1970?
Answer: Yukio Mishima (or Kimitake Hiraoka

1206. This ruler employed the sculptor Bek, and the blocks used for construction during this ruler's reign were known as talatats. This man's correspondence with Tushratta, king of the Mittani, discussed his marriage with Tadukhipa; those (+) letters were recovered by Jorgen Alexander Knudtzon on clay tablets at Amarna. Thutmose sculpted a bust of this man's wife, (*) Nefertiti, and this ruler was succeeded by his supposed son, Smenkhkare. For ten points, name this father of Tutankhamen, a pharaoh who venerated the sun disc Aten.
Answer: Akhenaten (or Amenhotep IV

1207. A British monarch of this name signed the Treaty of Alton with his brother Robert, though he later broke the peace by invading Normandy and winning the Battle of Tinchebray. The third British king of this name was opposed by (+) Simon de Montfort, who forced him to sign the Provisions of Oxford. This was the name of the British ruler who married (*) Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152. For ten points, give this British royal name, also shared by a king who feuded with Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Becket.
Answer: Henry (

1208. In one anecdote, this book's author beheaded two women when he was asked to supervise a battle between 180 courtesans. This book postulates the following hierarchy of targets: ideas, then alliances, then armies, then cities. This book's first chapter, about planning, lays out five fundamental factors in its title discipline including seasonal changes and terrain. Understanding battlefield geography is advocated in, for ten points, what strategy book written during the Spring and Autumn Period by Sun Tzu?
Answer: The Art of War (or Sunzi bingfa)

1209. This man was granted foreign aid from France through the Treaty of Barwalde. This man invaded Livonia in his early career to fend off a challenge from his Polish cousin Sigismund III, and his country was administered by Axel Oxenstierna after this man was slain leading a cavalry charge at Lützen. This man had earlier secured a decisive victory against the Holy Roman Empire at Breitenfeld. For ten points, name this Lion of the North who led Sweden in the Thirty Years War.
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus (or Gustav II Adolf) (3) This action was ruled to be unconstitutional in a Supreme Court case that resulted from the sale of federal bonds without the signature of a

1210. A music video supporting this plan states that when it reaches Puttalam, Sri Lankans won't have to worry about high power bills. A fund named for this plan is currently being used to construct the Karot Hydropower Project. In his 2016 policy address, Cy Leung mentioned this initiative by name over 40 times. A railway supporting this initiative connects London and Yiwu. Xi Jinping unveiled, for ten points, what massive Chinese infrastructure project that plans to rebuild an ancient trade route?
Answer: The Belt and Road Initiative (

1211. Eugene Schuyler created a report of atrocities in this country. In this country, the Batak Massacre was caused by Bashi-­‐Bazouks during the April Uprising. By the Treaty of San Stefano, this country was liberated from Ottoman Rule by Russia in 1878, but its northern neighbor gained Dobruja. William Gladstone denounced the “horrors” of this country in his Midlothian Campaign. Simeon II was the last Tsar of, for ten points, what Balkan nation north of Greece that is ruled from Sofia?
Answer: Bulgaria Page 1

1212. Raymond de Sauvetat was the first leader of a school of translators based in this city during the Middle Ages. This city, whose swords were once seen as the finest in Europe, is home to the Synagogue of El Transito in its Jewish quarter. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V ruled mainly from this Castilian city. For ten points, name this “Imperial City” in Spain that El Greco painted a famous view of.
Answer: Toledo ([toh-­‐LAY-­‐doh], but be lenient)

1213. This composer dramatized the destruction of Missolonghi during the Greek War of Indepenedence in his opera The Siege of Corinth. This composer repeated musical phrases in a namesake crescendo; that technique is employed in pieces like the overture to The Thieving Magpie. A galop known as “The March of the Swiss Soldiers” concludes the overture to this man’s final opera, which depicts a Swiss folk hero who shoots an apple off his son’s head. For ten points, name this Italian composer of William Tell.
Answer: Gioachino Rossini

1214. A member of this profession sued Jackie Onassis Kennedy after Secret Service agents destroyed his property; that man is Ron Galella. A character played by Walter Santesso in La Dolce Vita inspired the name of this profession, which is referred to as the "puppy squad" in China. In 1997, a Mercedes S280 that was being driven away from members of this group crashed in a tunnel, killing Dodi Fayed and Princess Diana. A 2013 law was passed to protect children of celebrities from being harassed by, for ten points, what notoriously aggressive type of photographer?
Answer: paparazzi (

1215. The generals Mundus and Mauricius died fighting this group at Salona. Boethius was executed for trying to kill a king of this group, who was served by Cassiodorus. At the Battle of Taginae, Narses killed Totila, a ruler of this group. The Lombards invaded the Byzantine Empire shortly after Justinian conquered this group. A ruler of these people, Theodoric, killed Odoacer and established a new capital city. Belisarius took Rome from, for ten points, what group of eastern Goths?
Answer: Ostrogoths (

1216. This man secured power after hiring North Korea to train the paramilitary Fifth Brigade, which he used to purge political enemies during the Gukurahundi period. This man’s removal of vice president Emerson Mnangagwa led to speculation that he planned to name his unpopular wife Grace as his successor, leading to his removal in a 2017 coup. This man’s reign was marked by an inflation rate that peaked at 100,000 percent in 2008. For ten points, name this longtime ruler of Zimbabwe.
Answer: Robert Mugabe Page 2

1217. The creation of this regime is remembered by a nationwide sounding of air raid sirens every September 18th. The Lytton Commission was established by the United Nations to investigate the creation of this state, which was founded after a failed dynamite attack on a railway track was used as a pretext for the Kwantung Army to launch an invasion. The Mukden Incident led to the establishment of this state, which installed Pu Yi as emperor. For ten points, name this Japanese puppet state installed in Manchuria.
Answer: Manchukuo (

1218. Marinetti claimed that this sculpture was not as beautiful as a racing car in the Futurist Manifesto, although futurist Umberto Boccioni used this sculpture's pose as a basis for his Unique Forms of Continuity in Space. This statue once stood on a stone reconstruction of a ship's prow, meant to celebrate a naval battle; it is now displayed atop the Daru Staircase in the Louvre. For ten points, name this headless Hellenistic sculpture of a female goddess with wings, found in 1863 on a namesake Greek island.
Answer: Winged Victory of Samothrace (or Nike of Samothrace

1219. This treaty required one signatory to cancel Article 27 of its constitution, which guaranteed reparations of land to indigenous people. As a result, this treaty was publicly attacked in the Lacandon Jungle Declaration by a group led by the ski-­‐mask wearing Subcomandante Marcos, the Zapatistas. Carlos Salinas de Gortari was a key negotiator of this treaty, which was described as causing a “giant sucking sound” by Ross Perot in a debate against Al Gore. For ten points, name this 1992 trade agreement signed by Canada, Mexico, and the US.
Answer: North American Free Trade Agreement (or NAFTA) BONUS: Donald Trump has curtailed US support for what other trade deal that focuses on intellectual property rights and improved labor and environmental standards with many countries around a namesake body of water? Trans-­‐Pacific Partnership or TPP Page 3

1220. This figure fought Francesco Maria I in the War of Urbino to secure his nephew’s rule over the city. This man received the embassy of the Portuguese king Manuel I, who had previously gifted this man an elephant named Hanno. This man presided over the closing of the Fifth Lateran Council and issued the papal bull Exsurge Domine [ex-­‐oor-­‐gay doh-­‐mee-­‐nay] in condemnation of the author of the 95 Theses. For ten points, name this pope who clashed with Martin Luther.
Answer: Pope Leo X (

1221. This project was spurred on by a 1986 conference led by Charles DeLisi in Santa Fe. The Celera Corporation, founded by Craig Venter, competed with this project using a “shotgun” technique and saw its stock price crash after President Clinton announced patents on this project’s findings would not be granted. Francis Collins and James Watson were leaders of, for ten points, what project, the world’s largest collaborative biological research project, that created a mosaic-­‐like mapping of the sequence of human DNA in the 1990s?
Answer: Human Genome Project (or HGP) BONUS: Which female scientist helped Watson and Crick on early research into DNA, including taking X rays of its shape, but died before she could receive a Nobel Prize for her work? Rosalind Franklin

1222. This country, which became formally independent during World War II, was subject to a bloodless British occupation earlier in the war to prevent a Nazi invasion. Halldur Laxness is one of the most famous authors in this country which had the world’s first openly lesbian prime minister. Thingvellir, which sits near the edge of the European and North American tectonic plates was the site of an early legislative assembly in, for ten points, what country where Reagan and Gorbachev once held a summit in Reykjavik?
Answer: Iceland BONUS: The most significant concentration of Icelandic immigrants

1223. "Iron Chancellor" who led Germany after its unification.
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

1224. German state whose monarch ruled Germany after unification.
Answer: Prussia (

1225. French palace whose Hall of Mirrors was the location of Germany's unification.
Answer: Versailles

1226. German state dissolved by unification ruled by Ludwig the "Swan King" before 1871.
Answer: Bavaria (

1227. Anti-­‐Catholic struggle of the German government after unification.
Answer: Kulturkampf

1228. Customs union proposed by Friedrich List as a forerunner to a unified German state.
Answer: Zollverein Page 5

1229. “Great” Russian empress who annexed the Crimea in 1783.
Answer: Catherine the Great

1230. Crimean city where Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met in a 1945 conference.
Answer: Yalta

1231. Ottoman sultan who annexed the Crimean Khanate in 1475.
Answer: Mehmed the Conqueror (or Mehmed II

1232. Crimean War nurse who became known as “the Lady with the Lamp” and modernized war nursing practices
Answer: Florence Nightingale

1233. HIghest British honor, created during the Crimean War, whose medals are legendary made from stolen Crimean cannon.
Answer: Victoria Cross

1234. Port city that was the subject of a year-­‐long Franco-­‐British siege during the Crimean War.
Answer: (Siege of) Sevastopol Page 6

1235. European country whose conquistadors conquered the Inca.
Answer: Spain

1236. Country where those conquistadors then built cities like Lima.
Answer: Peru

1237. Conquistador who led the expedition against the Incan Empire.
Answer: Francisco Pizarro

1238. Final emperor of the Inca who defeated his brother Huascar in a civil war.
Answer: Atahualpa

1239. Two precious metals that filled three rooms in order to ransom that emperor.
Answer: gold and silver (

1240. Incan capital city, the site of the Sacsayhuaman [sak-­‐say-­‐wha-­‐man] fortress.
Answer: Cusco Page 7

1241. This philosopher stirred up controversy by praising polytheism and suggesting it led to monotheistic religions in his (+) Natural History of Religion. A law named after this man states that thinkers commit a fallacy when they move from positive to normative statements and is called his (*) “is-­‐ought problem.” For ten points, name this Scottish philosopher who wrote An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.
Answer: David Hume

1242. A few former members of this group gathered intelligence as part of the Kit Carson Scouts. The book People’s War, People’s Army is described as this group’s “Insurrection Manual for (+) Underdeveloped Countries” and was written by a general who aided both his army and this group with supplies along the Truong Son trail. This group, which was targeted by the Strategic (*) Hamlet Program, attempted to expand into the Mekong Delta following the Tet Offensive. For ten points, name these communist guerrillas in South Vietnam.
Answer: Viet Cong (or the

1243. The Sich autonomous state was created for these people in the Treaty of Pereyaslav, which was signed in the wake of the Khmelnytsky [k’mel-­‐nit-­‐skee] uprising against PolishLithuanian control. These people extended their reach to the (+) Terek and Yaik after allying with government forces, but their ranks also included rebellious leaders like Stenka Razin and Yemelyan (*) Pugachev. This group was predominantly centered around the Dnieper and Don rivers. For ten points, name these autonomous horsemen who served as police and military units in 19th century Russia.
Answer: Cossacks

1244. A turning point in this period was the Battle of Naissus; a cavalry commander at that battle later defeated the Palmyrenes, a breakaway empire that formed during this period. Postumus’s Gallic Empire was also defeated by Aurelian near the end of this period, which began with the (+) Year of the Six Emperors and ended with the rule of Diocletian. Numerous generals took the imperial throne during this period, in which economic (*) breakdown ruined life on the frontier. For ten points, name this century in which the Roman Empire nearly fell completely apart.
Answer: (Crisis of the) Third Century (AD or CE)

1245. This scientist frequently borrowed the car of Klaus Fuchs [fooks] before Fuchs was discovered to be a Soviet spy. This scientist's "There's (+) Plenty of Room at the Bottom" is now considered one of the first conceptions of nanotechnology. While serving on the Rogers Commission, this scientist used a glass of (*) ice water to demonstrate the susceptibility of O-­‐rings to freezing temperatures, helping explain the Challenger disaster. The behavior of subatomic particles is described on diagrams named for, for ten points, what physicist and lecturer?
Answer: Richard Feynman ([fine-­‐man], but be lenient) Page 8

1246. The Women’s Death Battalion supported this man against a 1917 coup by his enemies. This Trudovik names an offensive against Austria-­‐Hungary that is also called the July Offensive. After the (+) Kornilov affair, this man became Commander in Chief; earlier, he replaced Prince Lvov as Prime Minister. A movement against this man called for (*) “peace, land and bread” and led to the October Revolution. For ten points, name this leader of the Russian Provisional Government who was ousted by the Bolsheviks under Lenin.
Answer: Alexander Kerensky

1247. Donald Richie claimed that this country’s early films were limited by a live narrator whose comments caused directors to be too subtle. A director from this country commented on its post-­‐war economy in a film where a woman is accused of stealing money to buy a (+) washing machine. In another film from this country, the title warriors defend a rural village from bandits after being united by (*) Kambei. This country relied more on Western film after its domestic production was disrupted by the 1923 Great Kanto earthquake. For ten points, name this country where Akira Kurosawa created Seven Samurai.
Answer: Japan (

1248. Wei Zheng [“way” zhun] advised this dynasty’s second emperor, Li Shimin [lee sh-­‐ming], also known as Taizong [“tie”-­‐zohn]. The Silla kingdom unified Korea against opposition from this dynasty, whose forces gave up the secret to making (+) paper after being defeated by Muslim troops at the Talas River. This dynasty’s rule was interrupted by the brief Zhou Dynasty, led by Wu Zetian [woo zuh-­‐tehn], China’s only female emperor. (*) An Lushan [ahn loo-­‐shahn] launched a revolt against, for ten points, what dynasty that followed the Sui [swee] and ruled during China’s golden age from the 7th to the 10th century?
Answer: Tang Dynasty [or Tang Chao]

1249. In 1986, this country’s leader, Samora Michel, died in a mysterious plane crash. The Rome General Peace Accords ended this country’s civil war. Uria Simango led a Marxist party in this country against the Rhodesian-­‐founded (+) Renamo party. The Frelimo party is the majority party in this country, which is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations despite being a former (*) Portuguese colony. For ten points, name this country that is separated from Madagascar by a namesake channel and governed from Maputo.
Answer: Mozambique BONUS: This South Vietnamese leader deposed Bao Dai in a rigged

1250. In one anecdote, this book's author beheaded two women when he was asked to supervise a battle between 180 courtesans. This book postulates the following hierarchy of targets: ideas, then alliances, then armies, then cities. This book's first chapter, about planning, lays out five fundamental factors in its title discipline including seasonal changes and terrain. Understanding battlefield geography is advocated in, for ten points, what strategy book written during the Spring and Autumn Period by Sun Tzu?
Answer: The Art of War (or Sunzi bingfa)

1251. This man was granted foreign aid from France through the Treaty of Barwalde. This man invaded Livonia in his early career to fend off a challenge from his Polish cousin Sigismund III, and his country was administered by Axel Oxenstierna after this man was slain leading a cavalry charge at Lützen. This man had earlier secured a decisive victory against the Holy Roman Empire at Breitenfeld. For ten points, name this Lion of the North who led Sweden in the Thirty Years War.
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus (or Gustav II Adolf) (3) This action was ruled to be unconstitutional in a Supreme Court case that resulted from the sale of federal bonds without the signature of a

1252. Description acceptable. In the final days of this event, Operation Thunder was called off when Viktor Karpukhin believed there would be too many civilian deaths. This event's failure led to the suicide of Boris Pugo and arrest of KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov. The State Committee on the State of Emergency was opposed by civilians erecting barricades outside the Russian White House during this event, where the Gang of Eight was thwarted by a speech atop a tank given by Boris Yeltsin. For ten points, name this coup that targeted the final leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: August Coup (or August Putsch

1253. Eugene Schuyler created a report of atrocities in this country. In this country, the Batak Massacre was caused by Bashi-­‐Bazouks during the April Uprising. By the Treaty of San Stefano, this country was liberated from Ottoman Rule by Russia in 1878, but its northern neighbor gained Dobruja. William Gladstone denounced the “horrors” of this country in his Midlothian Campaign. Simeon II was the last Tsar of, for ten points, what Balkan nation north of Greece that is ruled from Sofia?
Answer: Bulgaria Page 1

1254. This character, dressed in a pith helmet and safari clothing, interrogates Major Marchand at Fashoda in one cartoon from Punch. In another cartoon, this character impales a general as he tries to make a "jump" from ambition, power, and Calais to Dover as a satire of the Napoleonic Wars. This character, who was initially created by John Arbuthnot, asks "Who's absent? Is it you?" in a recruiting poster for World War I; in that representation, he wears a waistcoat with the pattern of the Union Jack on it. For ten points, name this national caricature of England.
Answer: John Bull

1255. Raymond de Sauvetat was the first leader of a school of translators based in this city during the Middle Ages. This city, whose swords were once seen as the finest in Europe, is home to the Synagogue of El Transito in its Jewish quarter. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V ruled mainly from this Castilian city. For ten points, name this “Imperial City” in Spain that El Greco painted a famous view of.
Answer: Toledo ([toh-­‐LAY-­‐doh], but be lenient)

1256. This composer dramatized the destruction of Missolonghi during the Greek War of Indepenedence in his opera The Siege of Corinth. This composer repeated musical phrases in a namesake crescendo; that technique is employed in pieces like the overture to The Thieving Magpie. A galop known as “The March of the Swiss Soldiers” concludes the overture to this man’s final opera, which depicts a Swiss folk hero who shoots an apple off his son’s head. For ten points, name this Italian composer of William Tell.
Answer: Gioachino Rossini

1257. A music video supporting this plan states that when it reaches Puttalam, Sri Lankans won't have to worry about high power bills. A fund named for this plan is currently being used to construct the Karot Hydropower Project. In his 2016 policy address, Cy Leung mentioned this initiative by name over 40 times. A railway supporting this initiative connects London and Yiwu. Xi Jinping unveiled, for ten points, what massive Chinese infrastructure project that plans to rebuild an ancient trade route?
Answer: The Belt and Road Initiative (

1258. A member of this profession sued Jackie Onassis Kennedy after Secret Service agents destroyed his property; that man is Ron Galella. A character played by Walter Santesso in La Dolce Vita inspired the name of this profession, which is referred to as the "puppy squad" in China. In 1997, a Mercedes S280 that was being driven away from members of this group crashed in a tunnel, killing Dodi Fayed and Princess Diana. A 2013 law was passed to protect children of celebrities from being harassed by, for ten points, what notoriously aggressive type of photographer?
Answer: paparazzi (

1259. The generals Mundus and Mauricius died fighting this group at Salona. Boethius was executed for trying to kill a king of this group, who was served by Cassiodorus. At the Battle of Taginae, Narses killed Totila, a ruler of this group. The Lombards invaded the Byzantine Empire shortly after Justinian conquered this group. A ruler of these people, Theodoric, killed Odoacer and established a new capital city. Belisarius took Rome from, for ten points, what group of eastern Goths?
Answer: Ostrogoths (

1260. This man secured power after hiring North Korea to train the paramilitary Fifth Brigade, which he used to purge political enemies during the Gukurahundi period. This man’s removal of vice president Emerson Mnangagwa led to speculation that he planned to name his unpopular wife Grace as his successor, leading to his removal in a 2017 coup. This man’s reign was marked by an inflation rate that peaked at 100,000 percent in 2008. For ten points, name this longtime ruler of Zimbabwe.
Answer: Robert Mugabe BONUS: Mugabe rose to prominence in a civil war against this man, who issued the Unilateral Declaration of Independence. Ian Smith

1261. The creation of this regime is remembered by a nationwide sounding of air raid sirens every September 18th. The Lytton Commission was established by the United Nations to investigate the creation of this state, which was founded after a failed dynamite attack on a railway track was used as a pretext for the Kwantung Army to launch an invasion. The Mukden Incident led to the establishment of this state, which installed Pu Yi as emperor. For ten points, name this Japanese puppet state installed in Manchuria.
Answer: Manchukuo (

1262. Marinetti claimed that this sculpture was not as beautiful as a racing car in the Futurist Manifesto, although futurist Umberto Boccioni used this sculpture's pose as a basis for his Unique Forms of Continuity in Space. This statue once stood on a stone reconstruction of a ship's prow, meant to celebrate a naval battle; it is now displayed atop the Daru Staircase in the Louvre. For ten points, name this headless Hellenistic sculpture of a female goddess with wings, found in 1863 on a namesake Greek island.
Answer: Winged Victory of Samothrace (or Nike of Samothrace

1263. This treaty required one signatory to cancel Article 27 of its constitution, which guaranteed reparations of land to indigenous people. As a result, this treaty was publicly attacked in the Lacandon Jungle Declaration by a group led by the ski-­‐mask wearing Subcomandante Marcos, the Zapatistas. Carlos Salinas de Gortari was a key negotiator of this treaty, which was described as causing a “giant sucking sound” by Ross Perot in a debate against Al Gore. For ten points, name this 1992 trade agreement signed by Canada, Mexico, and the US.
Answer: North American Free Trade Agreement (or NAFTA) BONUS: Donald Trump has curtailed US support for what other trade deal that focuses on intellectual property rights and improved labor and environmental standards with many countries around a namesake body of water? Trans-­‐Pacific Partnership or TPP

1264. This figure fought Francesco Maria I in the War of Urbino to secure his nephew’s rule over the city. This man received the embassy of the Portuguese king Manuel I, who had previously gifted this man an elephant named Hanno. This man presided over the closing of the Fifth Lateran Council and issued the papal bull Exsurge Domine [ex-­‐oor-­‐gay doh-­‐mee-­‐nay] in condemnation of the author of the 95 Theses. For ten points, name this pope who clashed with Martin Luther.
Answer: Pope Leo X (

1265. This project was spurred on by a 1986 conference led by Charles DeLisi in Santa Fe. The Celera Corporation, founded by Craig Venter, competed with this project using a “shotgun” technique and saw its stock price crash after President Clinton announced patents on this project’s findings would not be granted. Francis Collins and James Watson were leaders of, for ten points, what project, the world’s largest collaborative biological research project, that created a mosaic-­‐like mapping of the sequence of human DNA in the 1990s?
Answer: Human Genome Project (or HGP) BONUS: This scientist invented a namesake type of sequencing that was initially used by the Human Genome Project, for which he received his second Nobel Prize in Chemistry. This man also determined the primary structure of insulin. Frederick Sanger

1266. This country’s medieval period has been studied by sociologists and international relations theorists as an example of a functioning anarchic society. This country, which became formally independent during World War II, was subject to a bloodless British occupation earlier in the war to prevent a Nazi invasion. Halldur Laxness is one of the most famous authors in this country which had the world’s first openly lesbian prime minister. Thingvellir, which sits near the edge of the European and North American tectonic plates was the site of an early legislative assembly in, for ten points, what country where Reagan and Gorbachev once held a summit in Reykjavik?
Answer: Iceland BONUS: The most significant concentration of Icelandic immigrants

1267. "Iron Chancellor" who led Germany after its unification.
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

1268. German state whose monarch ruled Germany after unification.
Answer: Prussia (

1269. French palace whose Hall of Mirrors was the location of Germany's unification.
Answer: Versailles

1270. German state dissolved by unification ruled by Ludwig the "Swan King" before 1871.
Answer: Bavaria (

1271. Anti-­‐Catholic struggle of the German government after unification.
Answer: Kulturkampf

1272. Antecedent to a unified Germany established by Napoleon after conquering states along a namesake river.
Answer: Confederation of the Rhine

1273. Customs union proposed by Friedrich List as a forerunner to a unified German state.
Answer: Zollverein

1274. Philosopher who proposed a concept of Volksgeist to explain what he theorized was the German nation.
Answer: Johann von Herder Page 6

1275. “Great” Russian empress who annexed the Crimea in 1783.
Answer: Catherine the Great

1276. Crimean city where Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin met in a 1945 conference.
Answer: Yalta

1277. Ottoman sultan who annexed the Crimean Khanate in 1475.
Answer: Mehmed the Conqueror (or Mehmed II

1278. Crimean War nurse who became known as “the Lady with the Lamp” and modernized war nursing practices
Answer: Florence Nightingale

1279. HIghest British honor, created during the Crimean War, whose medals are legendary made from stolen Crimean cannon.
Answer: Victoria Cross

1280. Port city that was the subject of a year-­‐long Franco-­‐British siege during the Crimean War.
Answer: (Siege of) Sevastopol

1281. Crimean War battle during that siege that inspired Tennyson’s “Charge of the Light Brigade.”
Answer: Battle of Balaclava

1282. Field Marshal whose Highlanders formed the Thin Red Line in that battle.
Answer: Colin Campbell Page 7

1283. European country whose conquistadors conquered the Inca.
Answer: Spain

1284. Country where those conquistadors then built cities like Lima.
Answer: Peru

1285. Conquistador who led the expedition against the Incan Empire.
Answer: Francisco Pizarro

1286. Final emperor of the Inca who defeated his brother Huascar in a civil war.
Answer: Atahualpa

1287. Two precious metals that filled three rooms in order to ransom that emperor.
Answer: gold and silver (

1288. Incan capital city, the site of the Sacsayhuaman [sak-­‐say-­‐wha-­‐man] fortress.
Answer: Cusco

1289. Leader of the Neo-­‐Inca state in Vilcabamba, or the 18th century rebel of the same name, or the 20th century rapper who adopted this name.
Answer: Tupac Amaru (or Tupac Amaru II or Tupac (Amaru) Shakur)

1290. Language spoken throughout the empire that was suppressed under Spanish rule.
Answer: Quechua (

1291. This philosopher’s idea that a human being consists merely of its properties and nothing intrinsically substantive is known as his “bundle theory.” This philosopher stirred up controversy by praising polytheism and suggesting it led to monotheistic religions in his (+) Natural History of Religion. A law named after this man states that thinkers commit a fallacy when they move from positive to normative statements and is called his (*) “is-­‐ought problem.” For ten points, name this Scottish philosopher who wrote An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.
Answer: David Hume

1292. A few former members of this group gathered intelligence as part of the Kit Carson Scouts. The book People’s War, People’s Army is described as this group’s “Insurrection Manual for (+) Underdeveloped Countries” and was written by a general who aided both his army and this group with supplies along the Truong Son trail. This group, which was targeted by the Strategic (*) Hamlet Program, attempted to expand into the Mekong Delta following the Tet Offensive. For ten points, name these communist guerrillas in South Vietnam.
Answer: Viet Cong (or the

1293. The Sich autonomous state was created for these people in the Treaty of Pereyaslav, which was signed in the wake of the Khmelnytsky [k’mel-­‐nit-­‐skee] uprising against PolishLithuanian control. These people extended their reach to the (+) Terek and Yaik after allying with government forces, but their ranks also included rebellious leaders like Stenka Razin and Yemelyan (*) Pugachev. This group was predominantly centered around the Dnieper and Don rivers. For ten points, name these autonomous horsemen who served as police and military units in 19th century Russia.
Answer: Cossacks

1294. A turning point in this period was the Battle of Naissus; a cavalry commander at that battle later defeated the Palmyrenes, a breakaway empire that formed during this period. Postumus’s Gallic Empire was also defeated by Aurelian near the end of this period, which began with the (+) Year of the Six Emperors and ended with the rule of Diocletian. Numerous generals took the imperial throne during this period, in which economic (*) breakdown ruined life on the frontier. For ten points, name this century in which the Roman Empire nearly fell completely apart.
Answer: (Crisis of the) Third Century (AD or CE)

1295. This scientist frequently borrowed the car of Klaus Fuchs [fooks] before Fuchs was discovered to be a Soviet spy. This scientist's "There's (+) Plenty of Room at the Bottom" is now considered one of the first conceptions of nanotechnology. While serving on the Rogers Commission, this scientist used a glass of (*) ice water to demonstrate the susceptibility of O-­‐rings to freezing temperatures, helping explain the Challenger disaster. The behavior of subatomic particles is described on diagrams named for, for ten points, what physicist and lecturer?
Answer: Richard Feynman ([fine-­‐man], but be lenient) Page 9

1296. The Women’s Death Battalion supported this man against a 1917 coup by his enemies. This man gained fame reporting on the Lena Goldfields Massacre. This Trudovik names an offensive against Austria-­‐Hungary that is also called the July Offensive. After the (+) Kornilov affair, this man became Commander in Chief; earlier, he replaced Prince Lvov as Prime Minister. A movement against this man called for (*) “peace, land and bread” and led to the October Revolution. For ten points, name this leader of the Russian Provisional Government who was ousted by the Bolsheviks under Lenin.
Answer: Alexander Kerensky

1297. Donald Richie claimed that this country’s early films were limited by a live narrator whose comments caused directors to be too subtle. A director from this country commented on its post-­‐war economy in a film where a woman is accused of stealing money to buy a (+) washing machine. In another film from this country, the title warriors defend a rural village from bandits after being united by (*) Kambei. This country relied more on Western film after its domestic production was disrupted by the 1923 Great Kanto earthquake. For ten points, name this country where Akira Kurosawa created Seven Samurai.
Answer: Japan (

1298. Wei Zheng [“way” zhun] advised this dynasty’s second emperor, Li Shimin [lee sh-­‐ming], also known as Taizong [“tie”-­‐zohn]. The Silla kingdom unified Korea against opposition from this dynasty, whose forces gave up the secret to making (+) paper after being defeated by Muslim troops at the Talas River. This dynasty’s rule was interrupted by the brief Zhou Dynasty, led by Wu Zetian [woo zuh-­‐tehn], China’s only female emperor. (*) An Lushan [ahn loo-­‐shahn] launched a revolt against, for ten points, what dynasty that followed the Sui [swee] and ruled during China’s golden age from the 7th to the 10th century?
Answer: Tang Dynasty [or Tang Chao]

1299. In 1986, this country’s leader, Samora Michel, died in a mysterious plane crash. The Rome General Peace Accords ended this country’s civil war. Uria Simango led a Marxist party in this country against the Rhodesian-­‐founded (+) Renamo party. The Frelimo party is the majority party in this country, which is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations despite being a former (*) Portuguese colony. For ten points, name this country that is separated from Madagascar by a namesake channel and governed from Maputo.
Answer: Mozambique BONUS: This South Vietnamese leader deposed Bao Dai in a rigged

1300. In an effort to encourage dental health, this leader encouraged his population to chew on bones because dogs do so. This leader renamed the month of September after his book Ruhnama, whose study is required to obtain a driver’s license in his country. This leader commissioned the construction of an Arch of Neutrality, which contained a golden statue of himself that rotated to face the sun in the city of Ashgabat. For ten points, name this totalitarian ruler of post-­‐independence Turkmenistan from 1991 to his death in 2006.
Answer: Saparmurat Niyazov (or Turkmenbashi)

1301. Five deities were born from this goddess's necklace of 500 jewels. To lure this deity out of hiding, a dawn goddess performed a strip tease on top of an overturned tub. This goddess's brother threw a flayed horse into a room containing her weavers, causing her to retreat into a cave in anger. This goddess, who was born when her father Izanagi washed his left eye, is worshiped at the Ise [ee-­‐ say] Shrine. The Emperor of Japan descended from, for ten points, what sun goddess of Shinto myth?
Answer: Amaterasu

1302. The fourth and final section of a book by this man incorrectly tries to explain the origins of Earth’s tides. This man supported one of his arguments by citing the phases of Venus and apparent motion of sunspots. This man introduced the idea of inertial reference frames with a thought experiment about a man below deck on a ship, and wrote a book consisting of conversations between the laymen Sagredo, Simplicio, and Salviati. For ten points, name this author of a Diologue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, who was charged with heresy for supporting heliocentrism.
Answer: Galileo Galilei (

1303. A Sicilian ghulam named Jawhar was tasked with founding this city, which is home to a mosque dedicated to Ahmad ibn Tulun. Soldiers under Saladin made soles for their shoes out of books confiscated from the library of this city's still-­‐existing university at Al-­‐Azhar. The Fustat was burned to prevent this city's capture by Crusaders. For ten points, name this city whose modern incarnation was founded by the Fatimids in Egypt as their last capital.
Answer: Cairo

1304. In a battle in this province, Zhang Shijie was tricked by music to think that the enemy had a banquet. The Battle of Yamen occurred in this southern province, where the Hong factories operated prior to the Opium Wars. The Pearl River Delta lies in this province, which borders the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau. The most populous province in China is, for ten points, what region that contains a city once known as Canton?
Answer: Guangdong Page 1

1305. Marie van Goethem worked in this profession and, at age 14, served as a model for a bronze sculpture with a wax-­‐covered skirt. A bronze statuette of a girl wearing bangles was found in Mohenjo-­‐ daro in 1926 and is named for this assumed activity. This action is depicted in statues of Shiva nataraja, in which the god is encircled by a ring of fire with one leg raised. For ten points, name this activity depicted in Edgar Degas paintings of women practicing at the barre or performing in ballets.
Answer: dancing (

1306. Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII claimed in his autobiography that he was God’s instrument to save the people of this region. Pope Adrian IV agreed to the Treaty of Benevento with a ruler from this region. The Hauteville family established this region’s namesake kingdom under Roger II, whose daughter Constance eventually married Holy Roman Emperor Henry V. This island rebelled against the Angevin rule of Charles I during its namesake “vespers.” For ten points, name this kingdom primarily based on an island south of mainland Italy.
Answer: Kingdom of Sicily

1307. The 2013 film The Missing Picture depicts the rule of this group in the form of clay animation. In 1997, Nate Thayer was able to conduct an interview with this group's leader a year before he died. This group was responsible for killing around 40 percent of the Cham population, and it operated a prison that is now the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum. This group was ousted from power after a 1979 invasion from neighboring Vietnam. For ten points, name this communist group that was responsible for the killing fields in Cambodia under Pol Pot.
Answer: Khmer Rouge Second Quarter

1308. This feature stretches from its namesake city to Palpa via the Pampas de Jumana. In January 2018, a 40-­‐year-­‐old truck driver was arrested for driving through and damaging part of this UNESCO World Heritage Site. One theory claims that the constellation Orion is anamorphically represented by the giant spider in this series. A hummingbird and a condor are among the other curvilinear geoglyphs in, for ten points, what series of earthworks created by a namesake ancient Peruvian people?
Answer: Nazca Lines BONUS: In

1309. During this war, an imprisoned king rode across Europe in fifteen days to rejoin his troops, only to die a few years later at the siege of Frederiksten. In this war’s decisive battle, one side’s attempts to appoint Alexander Menshikov as head of the Cossacks led Ivan Mazepa to defect. The Treaty of Nystad ended this war, shortly after military reforms led to a great Russian victory at Poltava. For ten points, name this war in which Peter the Great prevailed over the Swedish Empire.
Answer: Great Northern War Page 2

1310. This event led to a retaliatory bombing of the commercial plane Emperor Kanishka, the first bombing of a 747 and the deadliest aircraft attack prior to 9/11. This event was replicated years later in the less controversial Operation Black Thunder. Operation Woodrose sought to quell protests after this event in the Punjab. This event sought to extricate Jarnail Bhindranwale from a compound in the Punjab. Disgruntled bodyguards assassinated Indira Gandhi in response to, for ten points, what June 1984 raid on the holiest site of Sikhism?
Answer: raid on the Golden Temple of Amritsar (

1311. This city's Academy of Saint Luke hosted lectures by artists who worked in this city like Federico Zuccaro. A scholarship established by Louis XIV called the "Prix [pree] de" [this place] allowed French architects and painters to study in this city. A statue of a personification of this city sits on a pedestal containing reliefs of a wolf and two infants in Jacques-­‐Louis David's depiction of lictors bringing bodies to Lucius Junius Brutus. The Trevi Fountain is located in, for ten points, what Italian city?
Answer: Rome (or Roma) BONUS: Which athletic venue in Rome, which could once seat over 100,000 people has now been turned into a public park? Circus Maximus

1312. This man gained power after pressing corruption charges against Charles La Vieuville, and he had earlier fallen from grace when Charles de Luynes assassinated this man's patron, Concino Concini. Marie de Medici attempted to remove this man on the Day of the Dupes. Though this man ordered the siege of a Huguenot stronghold in 1627, he allied France with the Protestants during the Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this advisor to Louis XIII who was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu BONUS: Richelieu ordered the siege of this Huguenot stronghold, a city of some 30,000 people on the Atlantic coast. The English sent two fleets to try to relieve this city, but neither worked. Seige of La Rochelle Page 3

1313. In the Aeneid, a god of this domain was the father of Circe, the mother of Latinus. A Roman emperor who worshiped a god of this domain controversially took the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa as his fourth wife; that emperor, who gave his name to a deity of this domain, was Elagabalus. A cult centered around an “unconquered” deity of this domain was popular in the Roman Empire until the 4th century. For ten points, give this domain of the deities Sol Invictus and Helios.
Answer: sun (

1314. To deal with a product created by this company, John Thach developed a "weave" tactic. James Murphy is one of two known living survivors of labor camps established by this company. In the 1920s, Herbert Smith and other engineers at Sopwith were hired to help make designs for this company. Vehicles nicknamed "Strong Gale" and "Raiden" were created by this company under Jiro Horikoshi. The A6M was designed by, for ten points, what aircraft manufacturer whose "Zeroes" were used in World War II kamikaze attacks?
Answer: Mitsubishi BONUS: Mitsubishi was one of the big four industrial conglomerates that dominated Japanese industry from the late 19th century to the end of World War II. Give the Japanese term for these conglomerates, which is somewhat analogous to the conglomerates known as chaebol in South Korea. Zaibatsu

1315. A documentary of "scorched earth techniques in China" inspired the first movement of a piece that this composer dubbed his "war symphony." This composer, whose Symphony in Three Movements was choreographed by George Balanchine, wrote the latter half of his neoclassical Symphony in C after fleeing Paris in 1939. This man wrote a ballet in which Kaschei the Immortal is defeated when Prince Ivan destroys a magic egg. For ten points, name this Russian-­‐born modernist composer of The Firebird who caused a Parisian riot with The Rite of Spring.
Answer: Igor Stravinsky BONUS: The Firebird was the first of Stravinsky's collaborations with what impresario, who founded the Ballets Russes ["ballet" roose] and also produced The Rite of Spring? Sergei Diaghilev Third Quarter The categories are ...

1316. Party led by Nelson Mandela that took over South Africa’s government after the fall of apartheid.
Answer: African

1317. Language spoken, alongside English, by South Africa’s formerly dominant white minority.
Answer: Afrikaans

1318. Bantu ethnic group that, along with the Zulu, made up most of South Africa’s black majority.
Answer: Xhosa ([ko-­‐sa], with a lateral click at the start; be lenient)

1319. President who brokered the end of apartheid and shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Mandela.
Answer: Fredrik Willem de Klerk

1320. Island on which Mandela was imprisoned for 27 years.
Answer: Robben Island

1321. Trial at which Nelson Mandela gave his “I am prepared to die” speech.
Answer: Rivonia Trial Page 5

1322. British South Pacific colony that first gave women suffrage in 1893 before they received this right in nearby Australia.
Answer: New Zealand

1323. Constitutional amendment that gave American women the right to vote.
Answer: 19th Amendment to the US Constitution

1324. 1848 meeting in New York at which the Declaration of Sentiments, calling for women’s suffrage, was issued.
Answer: Seneca Falls Convention

1325. American suffragette who refused to pay the fine she was issued for voting in the 1872 Presidential election.
Answer: Susan B. Anthony

1326. European country whose canton of Obwalden didn’t give women full suffrage until 1972.
Answer: Switzerland

1327. British family of suffragettes that included Sylvia and Emmeline.
Answer: Pankhurst family Page 6

1328. Color of Dehua [day-­‐wha] Ming porcelain, and paired with blue in earlier Chinese pottery.
Answer: white

1329. Eunuch [yoo-­‐nuk] explorer whose massive “treasure fleet” went on 7 voyages.
Answer: Zheng He (or Ma He)

1330. Complex in Beijing that served as the Ming imperial palace after it was built in 1420.
Answer: Forbidden City (or Zijin Cheng

1331. Structure that connected Beijing and Hangzhou, the oldest artificial river in the world.
Answer: Grand Canal

1332. Third Ming emperor, who employed that explorer, built that complex, and repaired that structure.
Answer: Yongle Emperor (or Zhu Di)

1333. 1449 “Crisis” where over 200,000 Ming soldiers were killed and the Zhengtong Emperor was captured by a small Mongol cavalry force.
Answer: Tumu Crisis (or Battle of Tumu

1334. A militia group called the Young Men was based in this city's neighborhood of Karantina. The Kahan Commission was appointed to investigate an event that occurred in this city, where the motto "Freedom, Sovereignty, Independence" was chanted during a 2005 revolution. In response to the death of (+) Bachir Gemayel, members of the Kataeb Party killed hundreds of refugees in this city during the Sabra and Shatila Massacre. The assassination of (*) Rafik Hariri in this city led to the Cedar Revolution. A Green Line once divided Muslims and Christians in, for ten points, what capital of Lebanon?
Answer: Beirut (

1335. This composer called for a piano with lutheal attachment in his violin rhapsody Tzigane. In 1910, this man orchestrated a piece meant to evoke a dancing infanta in Baroque-­‐era Spain. A pair of brothers killed by the same shell in (+) World War I were eulogized in a “Riguadon” this composer included as part of his Tombeau de Couperin. This composer of Pavane for a Dead Princess also wrote a (*) repetitive piece for Ida Rubenstein consisting of one long crescendo. For ten points, name this French composer of Bolero.
Answer: Maurice Ravel

1336. With the Slavs and the Avars, this empire led a 638 Siege of Constantinople against Heraclius. This empire collapsed to the Islamic Caliphate during Yazdegerd III’s reign. Emperor Valerian I was captured and turned into a human (+) footstool after the Battle of Edessa by this empire’s King Shapur I. This empire ruled from Ctesiphon signed a Treaty of Eternal Peace with the (*) Byzantine Emperor Justinian I. Khosrau the Great ruled, for ten points, what Persian empire that succeeded the Parthian Empire and continued to fight Rome?
Answer: Sassanid Empire (

1337. This novel fictionalizes John Felton as a Puritan who is deceived by his lover into murdering the Duke of Buckingham. A central plot point of this novel is the recovery of a group of diamond studs that Queen (+) Anne is asked to wear to a royal party. In this novel, Milady de Winter acts as an agent of (*) Cardinal Richelieu and vengefully poisons the woman who falls in love with D'Artagnan [dar-­‐tan-­‐yan]. For ten points, identify this Alexandre Dumas novel named after a trio of French soldiers.
Answer: The Three Musketeers (or Les Trois Mousquetaires)

1338. Edward Aethling was brought up in the court of this man’s wife Gisela of Bavaria. This man’s right hand became part of a cult and was stolen by Mercurius. This ruler was either crowned on Christmas or New Year’s Day with a crown from Pope Sylvester II. This Grand Prince succeeded (+) Geza and created the Archbishopric of Esztergom. To take power, this man killed the (*) Magyar prince Koppany, who ruled the region near Lake Balaton. Ladislaus I began the canonization campaign for this Arpad ruler and saint. For ten points, name this first Christian king of Hungary.
Answer: Saint Stephen I Page 8

1339. In this war, Dámaso Berenguer used "suffocating gas" with "true joy" after a supposed treachery of the indigenous people. One country's monarchy lost political support after this war's Disaster of Annual which helped spark a 1923 coup led by (+) Primo de Rivera. After French outposts along the Oureghla [wear-­‐g'lah] River were attacked in this war, the French intervened on the side of a fellow European nation. The city of (*) Melilla was spared during this war on the orders of Abd el-­‐Krim. For ten points, name this 1920s war in which Spain defeated a breakaway republic in northern Morocco.
Answer: Rif War

1340. During this man’s time as prime minister, Francis Atterbury was found to be in a Jacobite plot. Riots in Edinburgh occurred in this man’s premiership, after John Porteous killed several civilians. George (+) Grenville and William Pitt the Elder opposed this man with the “Boy Patriots.” This prime minister lost power during the War of (*) Jenkins’ Ear. This Whig gained power during the South Sea Bubble. For ten points, name this longest-­‐holding and first prime minister of Great Britain.
Answer: Robert Walpole

1341. This country’s Liberal and Conservative parties agreed to trade off the presidency in a 16-­‐ year period called the National Front. The M-­‐19 guerrilas became active in this country after Gustavo Rojas Pinilla lost a 1970 election. In 2016, this country’s president won the (+) Nobel Peace Prize for brokering a peace deal that this country’s people rejected in a referendum. This country was the base of power of the Medellin (*) Cartel, which ran the drug trade under Pablo Escobar. FARC rebels once fought in, for ten points, what country led by Juan Manuel Santos from Bogota?
Answer: Colombia

1342. Architects combined Baroque and Gothic styles to create this city's "Seven Sister" skyscrapers under the direction of Boris Iofan, who also designed a neoclassical palace that would have been built over the demolished Cathedral of Christ the (+) Saviour. An architect working in this city was blinded so he could never design anything as beautiful as his work on St. (*) Basil's Cathedral. In the 20th century, tanks commemorated the October Revolution with parades in Red Square in, for ten points, what capital of Russia?
Answer: Moscow BONUS: In

1343. In an effort to encourage dental health, this leader encouraged his population to chew on bones because dogs do so. This leader renamed the month of September after his book Ruhnama, whose study is required to obtain a driver’s license in his country. This leader commissioned the construction of an Arch of Neutrality, which contained a golden statue of himself that rotated to face the sun in the city of Ashgabat. For ten points, name this totalitarian ruler of post-­‐independence Turkmenistan from 1991 to his death in 2006.
Answer: Saparmurat Niyazov (or Turkmenbashi)

1344. Five deities were born from this goddess's necklace of 500 jewels. To lure this deity out of hiding, a dawn goddess performed a strip tease on top of an overturned tub. This goddess's brother threw a flayed horse into a room containing her weavers, causing her to retreat into a cave in anger. This goddess, who was born when her father Izanagi washed his left eye, is worshiped at the Ise [ee-­‐ say] Shrine. The Emperor of Japan descended from, for ten points, what sun goddess of Shinto myth?
Answer: Amaterasu

1345. The fourth and final section of a book by this man incorrectly tries to explain the origins of Earth’s tides. This man supported one of his arguments by citing the phases of Venus and apparent motion of sunspots. This man introduced the idea of inertial reference frames with a thought experiment about a man below deck on a ship, and wrote a book consisting of conversations between the laymen Sagredo, Simplicio, and Salviati. For ten points, name this author of a Diologue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, who was charged with heresy for supporting heliocentrism.
Answer: Galileo Galilei (

1346. This city's House of the Cretan Woman is located in a place of worship dedicated to a Turkic slave-­‐soldier. A Sicilian ghulam named Jawhar was tasked with founding this city, which is home to a mosque dedicated to Ahmad ibn Tulun. Soldiers under Saladin made soles for their shoes out of books confiscated from the library of this city's still-­‐existing university at Al-­‐Azhar. The Fustat was burned to prevent this city's capture by Crusaders. For ten points, name this city whose modern incarnation was founded by the Fatimids in Egypt as their last capital.
Answer: Cairo

1347. In a battle in this province, Zhang Shijie was tricked by music to think that the enemy had a banquet. The Battle of Yamen occurred in this southern province, where the Hong factories operated prior to the Opium Wars. The Pearl River Delta lies in this province, which borders the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau. The most populous province in China is, for ten points, what region that contains a city once known as Canton?
Answer: Guangdong Page 1

1348. Marie van Goethem worked in this profession and, at age 14, served as a model for a bronze sculpture with a wax-­‐covered skirt. A bronze statuette of a girl wearing bangles was found in Mohenjo-­‐ daro in 1926 and is named for this assumed activity. This action is depicted in statues of Shiva nataraja, in which the god is encircled by a ring of fire with one leg raised. For ten points, name this activity depicted in Edgar Degas paintings of women practicing at the barre or performing in ballets.
Answer: dancing (

1349. This figure is depicted lying on a bloody bed next to a standing red-­‐haired woman in a painting by Edvard Munch. In another depiction, a knife lies on the ground next to this man, who holds a letter on which the name "Charlotte Corday" is printed. In that painting, this eczema-­‐suffering man lies lifeless in a bathtub over which a green fabric is draped. For ten points, name this radical journalist and leader during the French Revolution, whose death was depicted by Jacques-­‐Louis David.
Answer: Jean-­‐Paul Marat (

1350. Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII claimed in his autobiography that he was God’s instrument to save the people of this region. Pope Adrian IV agreed to the Treaty of Benevento with a ruler from this region. The Hauteville family established this region’s namesake kingdom under Roger II, whose daughter Constance eventually married Holy Roman Emperor Henry V. This island rebelled against the Angevin rule of Charles I during its namesake “vespers.” For ten points, name this kingdom primarily based on an island south of mainland Italy.
Answer: Kingdom of Sicily

1351. The 2013 film The Missing Picture depicts the rule of this group in the form of clay animation. In 1997, Nate Thayer was able to conduct an interview with this group's leader a year before he died. This group was responsible for killing around 40 percent of the Cham population, and it operated a prison that is now the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum. This group was ousted from power after a 1979 invasion from neighboring Vietnam. For ten points, name this communist group that was responsible for the killing fields in Cambodia under Pol Pot.
Answer: Khmer Rouge

1352. During this battle, an army of Karluk mercenaries representing over half of the defending force defected, allowing them, albeit temporarily, to reaffirm their power in Western Turkestan. The Tibetan Empire capitalized on this defeat for Gao Xianzhi by conquering portions of India. In the aftermath of this battle, the invading side seized control of Transoxiana giving it access to the Silk Road. According to legend, prisoners taken at this battle were ordered to create paper in Samarkand, thus introducing the concept to the Muslim world. For ten points, name this 751 battle between the Abbasid Caliphate and Tang Dynasty, named for a Kyrgyzstan river.
Answer: Battle of Talas River (

1353. This feature stretches from its namesake city to Palpa via the Pampas de Jumana. In January 2018, a 40-­‐year-­‐old truck driver was arrested for driving through and damaging part of this UNESCO World Heritage Site. One theory claims that the constellation Orion is anamorphically represented by the giant spider in this series. A hummingbird and a condor are among the other curvilinear geoglyphs in, for ten points, what series of earthworks created by a namesake ancient Peruvian people?
Answer: Nazca Lines BONUS: In

1354. During this war, an imprisoned king rode across Europe in fifteen days to rejoin his troops, only to die a few years later at the siege of Frederiksten. In this war’s decisive battle, one side’s attempts to appoint Alexander Menshikov as head of the Cossacks led Ivan Mazepa to defect. The Treaty of Nystad ended this war, shortly after military reforms led to a great Russian victory at Poltava. For ten points, name this war in which Peter the Great prevailed over the Swedish Empire.
Answer: Great Northern War BONUS: After the Battle of Poltava, Charles XII of Sweden fled to the Ottoman Empire; the Russians were not happy, and waged this campaign from

1355. This thinker argued that totemic religions played a large part in developing the collective consciousness of a people in his Rules of the Sociological Method. In one study, this man pointed to stronger Catholic social controls as diminishing a phenomenon that he divided into egoistic, altruistic, fatalistic, and anomic types. Auguste Comte inspired, for ten points, what author of Elementary Forms of Religious Life and Suicide, a French pioneer of sociology?
Answer: Emile Durkheim BONUS: In his first published work, Durkheim

1356. To deal with a product created by this company, John Thach developed a "weave" tactic. James Murphy is one of two known living survivors of labor camps established by this company. In the 1920s, Herbert Smith and other engineers at Sopwith were hired to help make designs for this company. Vehicles nicknamed "Strong Gale" and "Raiden" were created by this company under Jiro Horikoshi. The A6M was designed by, for ten points, what aircraft manufacturer whose "Zeroes" were used in World War II kamikaze attacks?
Answer: Mitsubishi BONUS: Mitsubishi was one of the big four industrial conglomerates that dominated Japanese industry from the late 19th century to the end of World War II. Give the Japanese term for these conglomerates, which is somewhat analogous to the conglomerates known as chaebol in South Korea. Zaibatsu

1357. A documentary of "scorched earth techniques in China" inspired the first movement of a piece that this composer dubbed his "war symphony." This composer, whose Symphony in Three Movements was choreographed by George Balanchine, wrote the latter half of his neoclassical Symphony in C after fleeing Paris in 1939. This man wrote a ballet in which Kaschei the Immortal is defeated when Prince Ivan destroys a magic egg. For ten points, name this Russian-­‐born modernist composer of The Firebird who caused a Parisian riot with The Rite of Spring.
Answer: Igor Stravinsky BONUS: The Firebird was the first of Stravinsky's collaborations with what impresario, who founded the Ballets Russes ["ballet" roose] and also produced The Rite of Spring? Sergei Diaghilev

1358. This man gained power after pressing corruption charges against Charles La Vieuville, and he had earlier fallen from grace when Charles de Luynes assassinated this man's patron, Concino Concini. Marie de Medici attempted to remove this man on the Day of the Dupes. Though this man ordered the siege of a Huguenot stronghold in 1627, he allied France with the Protestants during the Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this advisor to Louis XIII who was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu BONUS: Richelieu ordered the siege of this Huguenot stronghold, a city of some 30,000 people on the Atlantic coast. The English sent two fleets to try to relieve this city, but neither worked. Seige of La Rochelle

1359. In the Aeneid, a god of this domain was the father of Circe, the mother of Latinus. A Roman emperor who worshiped a god of this domain controversially took the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa as his fourth wife; that emperor, who gave his name to a deity of this domain, was Elagabalus. A cult centered around an “unconquered” deity of this domain was popular in the Roman Empire until the 4th century. For ten points, give this domain of the deities Sol Invictus and Helios.
Answer: sun (

1360. This event led to a retaliatory bombing of the commercial plane Emperor Kanishka, the first bombing of a 747 and the deadliest aircraft attack prior to 9/11. This event was replicated years later in the less controversial Operation Black Thunder. Operation Woodrose sought to quell protests after this event in the Punjab. This event sought to extricate Jarnail Bhindranwale from a compound in Amritsar. Disgruntled bodyguards assassinated Indira Gandhi in response to, for ten points, what June 1984 raid on the holiest site of Sikhism?
Answer: raid on the Golden Temple of Amritsar (

1361. Party led by Nelson Mandela that took over South Africa’s government after the fall of apartheid.
Answer: African

1362. Language spoken, alongside English, by South Africa’s formerly dominant white minority.
Answer: Afrikaans

1363. Bantu ethnic group that, along with the Zulu, made up most of South Africa’s black majority.
Answer: Xhosa ([ko-­‐sa], with a lateral click at the start; be lenient)

1364. President who brokered the end of apartheid and shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Mandela.
Answer: Fredrik Willem de Klerk

1365. Island on which Mandela was imprisoned for 27 years.
Answer: Robben Island

1366. Trial at which Nelson Mandela gave his “I am prepared to die” speech.
Answer: Rivonia Trial

1367. Militant anti-­‐apartheid group, the armed wing of Mandela’s political party, that formed in 1961.
Answer: Spear of the Nation (or Umkhonto we Sizwe)

1368. Farm where Mandela hid while being pursued by police.
Answer: Lilliesleaf Farm Page 6

1369. Colony of the British Empire in the South Pacific where women were granted suffrage in 1893
Answer: New Zealand

1370. Constitutional amendment that gave American women the right to vote.
Answer: 19th Amendment to the US Constitution

1371. 1848 meeting in New York at which the Declaration of Sentiments, calling for women’s suffrage, was issued.
Answer: Seneca Falls Convention

1372. American suffragette who refused to pay the fine she was issued for voting in the 1872 Presidential election.
Answer: Susan B. Anthony

1373. Country which passed the Wartime Elections Act in 1917 allowing nursing sisters to vote during the First World War.
Answer: Canada

1374. British family of suffragettes that included Sylvia and Emmeline.
Answer: Pankhurst family

1375. European country whose region of Obwalden didn’t give women full suffrage until 1972
Answer: Switzerland

1376. Method by which British suffragette Emily Davison died in 1913, possibly suicidal and possibly in protest, in an accident at the Epsom Derby.
Answer: ran out onto the horse track and/or was hit by a passing (race)horse (

1377. Color of Dehua [day-­‐wha] Ming porcelain, and paired with blue in earlier Chinese pottery.
Answer: white

1378. Eunuch [yoo-­‐nuk] explorer whose massive “treasure fleet” went on 7 voyages.
Answer: Zheng He (or Ma He)

1379. Complex in Beijing that served as the Ming imperial palace after it was built in 1420.
Answer: Forbidden City (or Zijin Cheng

1380. Structure that connected Beijing and Hangzhou, the oldest artificial river in the world.
Answer: Grand Canal

1381. Third Ming emperor, who employed that explorer, built that complex, and repaired that structure.
Answer: Yongle Emperor (or Zhu Di)

1382. Rebel leader who overthrew the Ming in 1644 and ruled the Shun Dynasty for about a year.
Answer: Li Zicheng

1383. 1363 battle where Zhu Yuanzhang secured the fall of the Yuan Dynasty by destroying their fleet.
Answer: Battle of Lake Poyang

1384. 1449 “Crisis” where over 200,000 Ming soldiers were killed and the Zhengtong Emperor was captured by a small Mongol cavalry force.
Answer: Tumu Crisis (or Battle of Tumu

1385. A militia group called the Young Men was based in this city's neighborhood of Karantina. The Kahan Commission was appointed to investigate an event that occurred in this city, where the motto "Freedom, Sovereignty, Independence" was chanted during a 2005 revolution. In response to the death of (+) Bachir Gemayel, members of the Kataeb Party killed hundreds of refugees in this city during the Sabra and Shatila Massacre. The assassination of (*) Rafik Hariri in this city led to the Cedar Revolution. A Green Line once divided Muslims and Christians in, for ten points, what capital of Lebanon?
Answer: Beirut (

1386. This composer called for a piano with lutheal attachment in his violin rhapsody Tzigane. In 1910, this man orchestrated a piece meant to evoke a dancing infanta in Baroque-­‐era Spain. A pair of brothers killed by the same shell in (+) World War I were eulogized in a “Riguadon” this composer included as part of his Tombeau de Couperin. This composer of Pavane for a Dead Princess also wrote a (*) repetitive piece for Ida Rubenstein consisting of one long crescendo. For ten points, name this French composer of Bolero.
Answer: Maurice Ravel

1387. With the Slavs and the Avars, this empire led a 638 Siege of Constantinople against Heraclius. This empire collapsed to the Islamic Caliphate during Yazdegerd III’s reign. Emperor Valerian I was captured and turned into a human (+) footstool after the Battle of Edessa by this empire’s King Shapur I. This empire ruled from Ctesiphon signed a Treaty of Eternal Peace with the (*) Byzantine Emperor Justinian I. Khosrau the Great ruled, for ten points, what Persian empire that succeeded the Parthian Empire and continued to fight Rome?
Answer: Sassanid Empire (

1388. This city was saved from destruction following a loss at Cape Ecnomus thanks to the arrival of the Spartan mercenary Xanthippus [zan-­‐thi-­‐puss]. This city was able to retain its Libyan settlements after putting down a revolt in the (+) Truceless War. A commander from this city had his head thrown into his brother's tent following the Battle of the Metaurus. The (*) Fabian strategy of delay was used against this city, which met its final defeat when loud horns thwarted its contingent of elephants at the battle of Zama. For ten points, name this city that fought three Punic Wars with Rome.
Answer: Carthage

1389. Edward Aethling was brought up in the court of this man’s wife Gisela of Bavaria. This man’s right hand became part of a cult and was stolen by Mercurius. This ruler was either crowned on Christmas or New Year’s Day with a crown from Pope Sylvester II. This Grand Prince succeeded (+) Geza and created the Archbishopric of Esztergom. To take power, this man killed the (*) Magyar prince Koppany, who ruled the region near Lake Balaton. Ladislaus I began the canonization campaign for this Arpad ruler and saint. For ten points, name this first Christian king of Hungary.
Answer: Saint Stephen I Page 9

1390. In this war, Dámaso Berenguer used "suffocating gas" with "true joy" after a supposed treachery of the indigenous people. One country's monarchy lost political support after this war's Disaster of Annual which helped spark a 1923 coup led by (+) Primo de Rivera. After French outposts along the Oureghla [wear-­‐g'lah] River were attacked in this war, the French intervened on the side of a fellow European nation. The city of (*) Melilla was spared during this war on the orders of Abd el-­‐Krim. For ten points, name this 1920s war in which Spain defeated a breakaway republic in northern Morocco.
Answer: Rif War

1391. During this man’s time as prime minister, Francis Atterbury was found to be in a Jacobite plot. Riots in Edinburgh occurred in this man’s premiership, after John Porteous killed several civilians. George (+) Grenville and William Pitt the Elder opposed this man with the “Boy Patriots.” This prime minister lost power during the War of (*) Jenkins’ Ear. This Whig gained power during the South Sea Bubble. For ten points, name this longest-­‐holding and first prime minister of Great Britain.
Answer: Robert Walpole

1392. This country’s Liberal and Conservative parties agreed to trade off the presidency in a 16-­‐ year period called the National Front. The M-­‐19 guerrilas became active in this country after Gustavo Rojas Pinilla lost a 1970 election. In 2016, this country’s president won the (+) Nobel Peace Prize for brokering a peace deal that this country’s people rejected in a referendum. This country was the base of power of the Medellin (*) Cartel, which ran the drug trade under Pablo Escobar. FARC rebels once fought in, for ten points, what country led by Juan Manuel Santos from Bogota?
Answer: Colombia

1393. Architects combined Baroque and Gothic styles to create this city's "Seven Sister" skyscrapers under the direction of Boris Iofan, who also designed a neoclassical palace that would have been built over the demolished Cathedral of Christ the (+) Saviour. An architect working in this city was blinded so he could never design anything as beautiful as his work on St. (*) Basil's Cathedral. In the 20th century, tanks commemorated the October Revolution with parades in Red Square in, for ten points, what capital of Russia?
Answer: Moscow BONUS: In

1394. This body of water’s Diego Garcia Island has been the site of controversial American military installations. An island nation once ruled by Queen Ranavalona is located in this body of water, as is another island nation that once held a cabinet meeting underwater near Male (pr. MAH-­‐lay). For the point, name this body of water, which contains nations such as Madagascar and the Maldives.
Answer: Indian Ocean

1395. This monarch is memorialized by the “Wordless Stele (pr. STEE-­‐lee)” and this monarch’s grandson was the emperor Xuanzong. The emperor Gaozong entrusted much of his governance to this person after he suffered multiple strokes, and his death resulted in this person eventually seizing control, becoming the only empress regnant in Chinese history. The founder of the brief Zhou dynasty during the Tang dynasty, for the point, name this Chinese Empress.
Answer: Wu Zeitan

1396. The Four Oirats in what is now this country triggered the Tumu crisis when they captured the Zhengtong Emperor. The Battle of Yamen completed a conquest of China by people from this country, resulting in the founding of the Yuan Dynasty. For the point, name this modern-­‐day country whose capital city was renamed Ulaanbaatar during its Communist era.
Answer: Mongolia

1397. The breaking of the JN-­‐25 code allowed one side to intercept the other at this battle, where Tamon Yamaguchi went down with the Hiryu. The USS Yorktown was torpedoed during this battle, where the Japanese lost four aircraft carriers. For the point, name this decisive American naval victory which turned the tide in the Pacific theater.
Answer: Battle of Midway

1398. Before a controversial budget proposed by Hugh Gaitskell forced this man to resign, he negotiated the end of the occupation of Mandatory Palestine. This man established the National Health Service after winning a shock victory in the 1945 general election. For the point, name this Labour leader who succeeded Winston Churchill and thus attended the Potsdam Conference in his place.
Answer: Clement Attlee

1399. Legends about this man state that he tricked his brother into a pit of live coals in order to become king, but this man felt great remorse after seeing rivers run red during the Kalinga Wars and converted religions. This ruler later constructed lion-­‐topped rock edicts where laws inspired by dharma were written. For the point, name this Mauryan emperor who became a Buddhist.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Asoka the Great) Page 1

1400. This man used a tub of boiling water to kill his wife Fausta. During a civil war with Maxentius, this man, inspired by a vision of the letters chi [kye] and rho in the sky, won the Battle of Milvian Bridge. The Edict of Milan was signed by, for the point, what Roman emperor who renamed Byzantium after himself?
Answer: Constantine the Great (

1401. Following this event, Edmund Andros was deposed in Boston, and this event also removed a leader who lost the Battle of the Boyne. The English Bill of Rights was passed after this event, which was caused by the birth of a Catholic heir to James II. For the point, name this revolt which put William and Mary on the English throne.
Answer: Glorious Revolution

1402. This religion’s founder legendarily vanished after dying surrounded by flowers in 1539. Uniquely, this religion reveres its scripture as its final and eternal prophet and leader; that text is called the Granth Sahib. Langar halls attached to this religion’s Gurdwara temples provide free food to their community. For the point, name this Indian religion whose followers often take the last name Singh and follow the Five Ks.
Answer: Sikhism

1403. This man began the Four Modernizations and once summarized his favorable attitude towards capitalism by saying that the color of a cat doesn’t matter as long as it catches mice. This leader is generally credited with China’s economic rise and transition to a mixed economy during the 1980s. For the point, name this Chinese leader who established Special Economic Zones in an effort to modernize its economy.
Answer: Deng Xiaoping (pronounced “dung”, but

1404. The philosopher Empedocles legendarily died by throwing himself into a volcano on this island. Another philosopher was killed on this island after allegedly telling a Roman soldier “do not disturb my circles.” Archimedes died on, for the point, what Mediterranean island during the siege of Syracuse?
Answer: Sicily

1405. Much of the land that became this state was originally controlled by the Powhatan Confederacy. A Native American was claimed as the ancestor of many of this state’s “First Families” through Thomas Rolfe, son of John Rolfe and the Powhatan Pocahontas. For the point, name this first enduring English colony in the New World, now a state with historical sites at Williamsburg and Jamestown.
Answer: Virginia

1406. This material is one of the nicknames of a Duke who won the Peninsular War and part of the nickname of a British Prime Minister that won the Falklands War. This was one of the two materials that, according to Bismarck, would solve the great problems of the day. An age named after this material came after the Bronze Age. For the point, name this metal that comes in wrought variety and is used to make steel.
Answer: Iron

1407. The current president of this country owns a large confectionary company, which has led to him being nicknamed “the Chocolate King.” A recent leader of this country had his face disfigured after being poisoned with TCDD dioxin. Petro Poroshenko currently leads this country, where carousel voting was one of the fraudulent tactics used by Viktor Yanukovich in an election that caused the Orange Revolution. For the point, name this country where, in 2014, Russia annexed the Crimea.
Answer: Ukraine

1408. A writer from this island wrote a work that dismisses finding uses for the elderly since “they are every day dying”; that work was titled “A Modest Proposal For preventing the Children of Poor People From being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country”. That writer from this island also wrote a work in which the title character visits Brobdingnag and Liliput, Gulliver’s Travels. For the point, name this island where Jonathan Swift was born in Dublin
Answer: Ireland

1409. This event ended plans to create the agricultural empire of New Helvetia. This event was publicized by Samuel Brannan, who ran down streets shouting the news about it. A dry goods business was operated by Levi Strauss during this event, which began after John Marshall made a discovery at Sutter’s Mill. The “49ers” raced to, for the point, what economic boon in which miners flocked to Sacramento to find riches?
Answer: California Gold Rush (

1410. This man ordered his secret police to massacre the city of Novgorod after it was accused of working with Poland, and this man once blinded the architect of St. Basil’s Cathedral to prevent him from making anything as beautiful again. The incapable Feodor succeeded this man after this man had killed his son in a rage. For the point, name this Russian tsar known for his cruelty.
Answer: Ivan the Terrible (

1411. This man was forced out of a window by his lover Manuela Saenz to avoid assassins in the September Conspiracy. Peninsulares who opposed this man were subject to murder after this man issued the “Decree of War to the Death” during the Admirable Campaign. This man attended the Guayaquil Conference with Jose de San Martin after engineering a victory at Boyaca to secure independence from Spain. For the point, name this general, known as the “Liberator” of South America.
Answer: Simon Bolivar Page 3

1412. Debris from one tragedy involving this company have been found on La Reunion and Madagascar. Four months later, in another event involving this company, another of its planes was lost due to a surface to air missile launched by Russian forces. One of this company’s planes vanished in 2014 and is presumed to have crashed in the Indian Ocean. For the point, name this company whose planes often use Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Answer: Malaysia(n) Airlines

1413. In 1934, this scientist claimed to have invented a superweapon called the Teleforce which is commonly known as his death ray. He invented a namesake coil and feuded with Thomas Edison in the “War of the Currents”. For the point, name this Serbian-­‐American inventor and namesake of an electric car brand
Answer: Nikola Tesla

1414. This event was avenged during the Liberators’ Civil War, in which the Battle of Philippi led to the suicide of the perpetrator Cassius. The target of this event had been stopped near Pompey’s Theater and stabbed 23 times by a group led by Brutus. For the point, name this 44 BC attack on the Ides of March against a Roman ruler.
Answer: assassination (or murder, stabbing, etc.) of Gaius Julius Caesar (

1415. One of this artist’s works contains a self-­‐portrait as St. Bartholomew holding his flayed skin during the Last Judgment. This man’s most famous sculpture is a marble depiction of David which is found in Florence. God touches fingertips with the first man in The Creation of Adam by, for the point, what Italian artist who was commissioned to paint the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?
Answer: Michelangelo Buonarroti

1416. A civil “War of Two Brothers” weakened this empire and led to the defeat of Huascar. This empire’s final ruler was ransomed for a room full of gold. Before this empire fell to the conquistador Francisco Pizarro, it housed large population centers at Cuzco and Machu Picchu. For the point, name this pre-­‐Columbian empire based in Peru.
Answer: Incan Empire

1417. One side took advantage of this battle to launch the Little Saturn attack plan and target Rostov. This battle culminated with Operation Uranus, which led to the encirclement of the Sixth Army and the eventual surrender of Friedrich Paulus. For the point, name this 1942 battle on the Volga that is cited as the Eastern Front’s turning point.
Answer: Battle of Stalingrad

1418. The Caravan of Death began executing political prisoners under this man’s regime, and his DINA secret police spearheaded Operation Condor to purge left-­‐wing elements in his country. This man came to power with CIA aid after his predecessor attempted to nationalize the copper industry. For the point, name this successor of Salvador Allende, a dictator of Chile.
Answer: Augusto Pinochet Page 4

1419. This body of water’s Diego Garcia Island has been the site of controversial American military installations. An island nation once ruled by Queen Ranavalona is located in this body of water, as is another island nation that once held a cabinet meeting underwater near Male (pr. MAH-­‐lay). For the point, name this body of water, which contains nations such as Madagascar and the Maldives.
Answer: Indian Ocean

1420. This monarch is memorialized by the “Wordless Stele (pr. STEE-­‐lee)” and this monarch’s grandson was the emperor Xuanzong. The emperor Gaozong entrusted much of his governance to this person after he suffered multiple strokes, and his death resulted in this person eventually seizing control, becoming the only empress regnant in Chinese history. The founder of the brief Zhou dynasty during the Tang dynasty, for the point, name this Chinese Empress.
Answer: Wu Zeitan

1421. An ancient culture discovered in this country produced a clay dove sculpture that is found on the back of its 20 kuna note; that culture, the Vucedol inhabited areas like Vukovar. The Neolithic Danilo culture primarily lived in what is now this country’s portion of the Dalmatian Coast. For the point, name this country, once a part of Yugoslavia, where prehistoric sites have been found near Zagreb.
Answer: Croatia

1422. This person’s discovery of David Greybeard’s behavior was met with the response “Now we must redefine tool, redefine man.” Birute Galdikas, Dian Fossey, and this woman were chosen by Louis Leakey to observe animals in their natural environments. For the point, name this scientist who established a research station at Gombe National Park in Tanzania to study chimpanzees.
Answer: Jane Goodall

1423. This modern-­‐day country contains the Bain Tsotko Inscriptions, the oldest records of the Turkic language family, as well as the Orkhon Inscriptions. The Four Oirats in what is now this country triggered the Tumu crisis when they captured the Zhengtong Emperor. The Battle of Yamen completed a conquest of China by people from this country, resulting in the founding of the Yuan Dynasty. For the point, name this modern-­‐day country whose capital city was renamed Ulaanbaatar during its Communist era.
Answer: Mongolia Page 1

1424. George Gay was sole survivor of one bomber squadron that fought in this battle, which occurred at the same time as an attack on Dutch Harbor. The breaking of the JN-­‐25 code allowed one side to intercept the other at this battle, where Tamon Yamaguchi went down with the Hiryu. The USS Yorktown was torpedoed during this battle, where the Japanese lost four aircraft carriers. For the point, name this decisive American naval victory which turned the tide in the Pacific theater.
Answer: Battle of Midway

1425. Before a controversial budget proposed by Hugh Gaitskell forced this man to resign, he negotiated the end of the occupation of Mandatory Palestine. This man established the National Health Service after winning a shock victory in the 1945 general election. For the point, name this Labour leader who succeeded Winston Churchill and thus attended the Potsdam Conference in his place.
Answer: Clement Attlee

1426. Legends about this man state that he tricked his brother into a pit of live coals in order to become king, but this man felt great remorse after seeing rivers run red during the Kalinga Wars and converted religions. This ruler later constructed lion-­‐topped rock edicts where laws inspired by dharma were written. For the point, name this Mauryan emperor who became a Buddhist.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Asoka the Great)

1427. After renovating Trier as ruler of the West, this leader won the Battle of Chrysopolis against Licinius, a man he had earlier ruled with as part of the Tetrarchy. This man used a tub of boiling water to kill his wife Fausta. During a civil war with Maxentius, this man, inspired by a vision of the letters chi [kye] and rho in the sky, won the Battle of Milvian Bridge. The Edict of Milan was signed by, for the point, what Roman emperor who renamed Byzantium after himself?
Answer: Constantine the Great (

1428. Following this event, Edmund Andros was deposed in Boston, and this event also removed a leader who lost the Battle of the Boyne. The English Bill of Rights was passed after this event, which was caused by the birth of a Catholic heir to James II. For the point, name this revolt which put William and Mary on the English throne.
Answer: Glorious Revolution

1429. This religion’s founder legendarily vanished after dying surrounded by flowers in 1539. Uniquely, this religion reveres its scripture as its final and eternal prophet and leader; that text is called the Granth Sahib. Langar halls attached to this religion’s Gurdwara temples provide free food to their community. For the point, name this Indian religion whose followers often take the last name Singh and follow the Five Ks.
Answer: Sikhism Page 2

1430. This man began the Four Modernizations and once summarized his favorable attitude towards capitalism by saying that the color of a cat doesn’t matter as long as it catches mice. This leader is generally credited with China’s economic rise and transition to a mixed economy during the 1980s. For the point, name this Chinese leader who established Special Economic Zones in an effort to modernize its economy.
Answer: Deng Xiaoping (pronounced “dung”, but

1431. A philosopher from this island proposed love and strife as additions to the four classical elements. The philosopher Empedocles legendarily died by throwing himself into a volcano on this island. Another philosopher was killed on this island after allegedly telling a Roman soldier “do not disturb my circles.” Archimedes died on, for the point, what Mediterranean island during the siege of Syracuse?
Answer: Sicily

1432. A Native American attack in what is now this state destroyed Henricus in 1622. Much of the land that became this state was originally controlled by the Powhatan Confederacy. A Native American was claimed as the ancestor of many of this state’s “First Families” through Thomas Rolfe, son of John Rolfe and the Powhatan Pocahontas. For the point, name this first enduring English colony in the New World, now a state with historical sites at Williamsburg and Jamestown.
Answer: Virginia

1433. This war included the Battle of the Chinese Farm, where Ariel Sharon’s troops attempted to defend a bridge crossing. After this conflict began with the surprise attack Operation Badr, Henry Kissinger conducted “shuttle diplomacy” to secure a ceasefire. The Camp David Accords brought an end to this conflict with Egypt and Syria. For the point, name this conflict in which Israel was attacked on the Day of Atonement.
Answer: Yom Kippur War (

1434. This man’s raiding of Darien resulted in the capture of 20 tons of gold and silver during an attack on Nombre de Dios. On another expedition, this man left a bronze plaque to claim the San Francisco Bay area after landing in New Albion. This man boasted of “singeing the beard of the king of Spain” after he successfully launched a raid on Cadiz. For the point, name this English captain of the Golden Hind who completed the second circumnavigation of the globe and fought the Spanish Armada.
Answer: Sir Francis Drake Page 3

1435. This material is one of the nicknames of a Duke who won the Peninsular War and part of the nickname of a British Prime Minister that won the Falklands War. This was one of the two materials that, according to Bismarck, would solve the great problems of the day. An age named after this material came after the Bronze Age. For the point, name this metal that comes in wrought variety and is used to make steel.
Answer: Iron

1436. The current president of this country owns a large confectionary company, which has led to him being nicknamed “the Chocolate King.” A recent leader of this country had his face disfigured after being poisoned with TCDD dioxin. Petro Poroshenko currently leads this country, where carousel voting was one of the fraudulent tactics used by Viktor Yanukovich in an election that caused the Orange Revolution. For the point, name this country where, in 2014, Russia annexed the Crimea.
Answer: Ukraine

1437. A writer from this island wrote a work that dismisses finding uses for the elderly since “they are every day dying”; that work was titled “A Modest Proposal For preventing the Children of Poor People From being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country”. That writer from this island also wrote a work in which the title character visits Brobdingnag and Liliput, Gulliver’s Travels. For the point, name this island where Jonathan Swift was born in Dublin
Answer: Ireland

1438. This event ended plans to create the agricultural empire of New Helvetia. This event was publicized by Samuel Brannan, who ran down streets shouting the news about it. A dry goods business was operated by Levi Strauss during this event, which began after John Marshall made a discovery at Sutter’s Mill. The “49ers” raced to, for the point, what economic boon in which miners flocked to Sacramento to find riches?
Answer: California Gold Rush (

1439. This man ordered his secret police to massacre the city of Novgorod after it was accused of working with Poland, and this man once blinded the architect of St. Basil’s Cathedral to prevent him from making anything as beautiful again. The incapable Feodor succeeded this man after this man had killed his son in a rage. For the point, name this Russian tsar known for his cruelty.
Answer: Ivan the Terrible (

1440. This man was forced out of a window by his lover Manuela Saenz to avoid assassins in the September Conspiracy. Peninsulares who opposed this man were subject to murder after this man issued the “Decree of War to the Death” during the Admirable Campaign. This man attended the Guayaquil Conference with Jose de San Martin after engineering a victory at Boyaca to secure independence from Spain. For the point, name this general, known as the “Liberator” of South America.
Answer: Simon Bolivar Page 4

1441. Debris from one tragedy involving this company have been found on La Reunion and Madagascar. Four months later, in another event involving this company, another of its planes was lost due to a surface to air missile launched by Russian forces. One of this company’s planes vanished in 2014 and is presumed to have crashed in the Indian Ocean. For the point, name this company whose planes often use Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Answer: Malaysia(n) Airlines

1442. This man claimed that his mechanical oscillator managed to cause an earthquake in downtown New York City, and he postulated that electricity could be used to locate submarines. In 1934, this scientist claimed to have invented a superweapon called the Teleforce which is commonly known as his death ray. He invented a namesake coil and feuded with Thomas Edison in the “War of the Currents”. For the point, name this Serbian-­‐American inventor and namesake of an electric car brand
Answer: Nikola Tesla

1443. This event was avenged during the Liberators’ Civil War, in which the Battle of Philippi led to the suicide of the perpetrator Cassius. The target of this event had been stopped near Pompey’s Theater and stabbed 23 times by a group led by Brutus. For the point, name this 44 BC attack on the Ides of March against a Roman ruler.
Answer: assassination (or murder, stabbing, etc.) of Gaius Julius Caesar (

1444. According to legend, one of this artist’s works was damaged when he hit it with a hammer and commanded it to speak; that sculpture was created for the tomb of Pope Julius II. Another of this artist’s works contains a self-­‐portrait as St. Bartholomew holding his flayed skin during the Last Judgment. God touches fingertips with the first man in The Creation of Adam by, for the point, what Italian artist who was commissioned to paint the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?
Answer: Michelangelo Buonarroti

1445. This civilization’s name comes from the Greek for ‘purple people’ due to the fact that they produced purple dye for Mesopotamian royalty. Sidon and Tyre were both major cities of this civilization, and a famous supposed member of this civilization fled after her husband was murdered and established a new city at Carthage. For the point, name this ancient eastern-­‐ Mediterranean civilization that was centered in modern Lebanon.
Answer: Phoenicians

1446. This empire was attacked by foreign troops after its ruler threw a Bible at the ground, insulting friar Vicente. A civil “War of Two Brothers” weakened this empire and led to the defeat of Huascar. This empire’s final ruler was ransomed for a room full of gold. Before this empire fell to the conquistador Francisco Pizarro, it housed large population centers at Cuzco and Machu Picchu. For the point, name this pre-­‐Columbian empire based in Peru.
Answer: Incan Empire Page 5

1447. During this battle, one side’s lack of rations prompted Kurt von Zeitzler to begin starving himself as a sign of solidarity. One side took advantage of this battle to launch the Little Saturn attack plan and target Rostov. This battle culminated with Operation Uranus, which led to the encirclement of the Sixth Army and the eventual surrender of Friedrich Paulus. For the point, name this 1942 battle on the Volga that is cited as the Eastern Front’s turning point.
Answer: Battle of Stalingrad

1448. This man organized the car bombing of diplomat Orlando Letelier on the streets of Washington D.C. The Caravan of Death began executing political prisoners under this man’s regime, and his DINA secret police spearheaded Operation Condor to purge left-­‐wing elements in his country. This man came to power with CIA aid after his predecessor attempted to nationalize the copper industry. For the point, name this successor of Salvador Allende, a dictator of Chile.
Answer: Augusto Pinochet Page 6

1449. This civilization’s Mehrgarh period provided early evidence of animal herding. The Great Granary and the ancient world’s first public bath were built by this civilization at the Mound of the Dead. This civilization was centered around the Sindh province of Pakistan and included cities like Harappa and Mohenjo-­‐Daro. For the point, name this Bronze Age civilization, named for a river valley.
Answer: Indus (River) Valley Civilization

1450. After ascending to the throne, this man reduced the role of the Potsdam Giants. This monarch was victorious at the battle of Hohenfriedberg, leading to the Treaty of Dresden. He secured his claim on Silesia, which he had seized from Maria Theresa in 1742. For the point, name this “enlightened despot” of Prussia.
Answer: Frederick the Great (

1451. The Schwedagon Pagoda is found in this nation, and the “National League for Democracy” political party of this nation is led by a politician who has recently faced calls to have her Nobel Peace Prize revoked. That politician, Aung San Suu Kyi (pr. CHEE), has done little to help the plight of the Rohingya people within this nation. For the point, name this nation formerly known as Burma.
Answer: Myanmar (

1452. The U.S. signed the 1800 Treaty of Mortefontaine with this country, ending the Quasi-­‐War. This country’s forces were defeated by the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu ending their colonization of Vietnam. A marquis from this country commanded a contingent of troops at Yorktown. For the point, name this home country of the Marquis de Lafayette who aided the USA in the American Revolution.
Answer: France

1453. In one of this man’s novels, a general is thought to be the “beast prophesied in the Apocalypse” after his name is found to correspond to the number 666. This author, whose Sevastopol Sketches were set during the Crimean War, wrote about Pierre Bezhukov watching the Battle of Borodino during Napoleon’s invasion of Russia. For the point, name this Russian author of War and Peace.
Answer: Leo Tolstoy

1454. Askari troops led by Paul Von Lettow Vorbeck fought in this conflict, during which the Battle of Lake Tanganyika took place. An Arab revolt against the Ottomans during this conflict was assisted by Lawrence of Arabia, while Mustafa Kemal Ataturk came to prominence during this war’s Gallipoli campaign. For the point, name this war which ended with the Treaty of Versailles.
Answer: World War I (or the Great War) Page 1

1455. This structure’s east-­‐west orientation, suggests it may have been meant for a royal funeral, and this structure has reservoirs called barays. This complex sits on the Siam Reap River, and it was constructed by Suryavarman II. It appears on the flag of the modern country in which it is located, and it was built by the Khmer Empire. For the point, name this monumental religious site in Cambodia.
Answer: Angkor Wat

1456. Prior to this battle, the losing commander vowed to avenge the burning of Sardis by destroying Eretria. Groves of trees protected the flanks of this battle’s winning side, who had waited five days to attack and finally made the decision to strike after Callimachus broke a vote. For the point, name this 490 BC victory over the Persians which preceded Pheidippides’ 26-­‐mile run to relay the news to Athens.
Answer: Battle of Marathon

1457. The Mediterranean fell under this man’s control after his corsair Barbarossa won the Battle of Preveza. This man, who fell sick and died shortly after the siege of Szigetvar, scored his most famous victory over Louis II of Hungary at the Battle of Mohacs [moh-­‐hotch]. For the point, name this longest reigning Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (

1458. The 11th Indian Infantry division was decisively defeated at the Battle of Silm River during this campaign. The HMS Prince of Wales and Repulse were sunk by air attack during this campaign, which culminated in a retreat to an island across the Johor strait. For the point, name this World War II campaign where an Axis power invaded a Southeast Asian British colony.
Answer: Malayan Campaign (

1459. This leader defeated King Porus at the Battle of the Hydaspes River but later ended his invasion of India when his troops revolted. This leader won the Battles of the Granicus River and Issus before decisively defeating Darius III of Persia at the Battle of Gaugamela. For the point, name this Macedonian conqueror often nicknamed “The Great”
Answer: Alexander the Great

1460. During this conflict, Lord Roberts was replaced by Horatio Kitchener, who expanded the usage of concentration camps. This conflict ended after the Treaty of Vereeniging was signed between the Orange Free State and Great Britain. For the point, name this 1899 conflict involving Dutch-­‐speaking farmers in South Africa.
Answer: Second Anglo-­‐Boer War

1461. This battle is alternatively known as Operation Watch on the Rhine. During this battle, George Patton claimed he could relieve Bastogne in just 48 hours. One side in this battle launched an attack through the Ardennes Forest in an attempt to recapture Antwerp. For the point, name this 1944 battle named for the shape made in the American front lines.
Answer: Battle of the Bulge (

1462. Howard Florey and Ernst Chain employed a group of girls at Oxford to grow this substance on the surfaces of bathtubs before improved methods of growing it in submerged culture were developed. A British police officer with a face wound became the first patient treated with injections of this substance in 1941. An accidentally-­‐uncovered Petri dish helped Alexander Fleming discover, for the point, what mold that became a massively successful antibiotic in the mid-­‐20th century?
Answer: penicillin

1463. A “fortress in the sky,” Sigiriya, was built in this country, where Anula became the first woman to be president of an Asian nation. A famous tooth relic of the Buddha is located in this country’s city of Kandy. Adam’s Bridge connects the mainland to, for the point, what island country where the Tamil Tigers fought a lengthy civil war in the Indian Ocean?
Answer: Sri Lanka

1464. This program was introduced in a speech that declared “millions cannot and shall not hope in vain.” This program began with a bank holiday and the passing of the Glass-­‐Steagall Act. The Tennessee Valley Authority was established as part of, for the point, what domestic program by Franklin Roosevelt that fought to end the Great Depression?
Answer: New Deal

1465. The Battle of Lake Poyang led to the establishment of this dynasty under its first emperor, Hongwu. This dynasty built the Forbidden City and brought back giraffes after sending admiral Zheng He on a series of voyages. It eventually fell to Manchu invasions. For the point, name this last ethnically Han Chinese dynasty, which fell in 1644.
Answer: Ming Dynasty

1466. Foreign enemies of this man formed the Grand Alliance to oppose his expansionism, and this king was targeted domestically in the Fronde revolt. This man revoked the Edict of Nantes with the Edict of Fontainebleau, ending toleration for Huguenots, and he defended his policies by declaring “I am the state.” For the point, name this despotic French monarch known as the Sun King.
Answer: Louis XIV [14] (

1467. On this river, Union forces under Andrew Foote and John Pope captured the strategic Island Number 10. The New Madrid [MAH-­‐drid] Earthquake, which drew support for Tecumseh, caused this river to flow backwards. For the point, name this river that travels past New Orleans into the Gulf of Mexico.
Answer: Mississippi River

1468. This leader was forced to resign after facing an internal party challenge from Michael Heseltine. James Callaghan was replaced by this leader after facing the “winter of discontent.” The Poll Tax riots began after this politician instituted the unpopular Community Charge. After removing free dairy products for schoolkids, this leader was disparaged as a “milk snatcher.” For the point, name this conservative Prime Minister of the UK, known as the “Iron Lady.”
Answer: Margaret Thatcher Page 3

1469. This event led to the banning of the RSS party for the first time and the false arrest of Vinayak Savarkar. A young girl tried to stop this event’s perpetrator by saying “Bapu is already late.” This event took place as its target went to the Birla House for morning prayer. The prime minister declared “the light has gone out from our lives” after Nathuram Godse carried out this event. For the point, name this January 30, 1948 event in which a non-­‐violent Indian independence leader was killed.
Answer: assassination (or murder, shooting, etc.) of Mohandas Gandhi (or of Mahatma Gandhi) (

1470. After viewing one painting featuring this man, Arthur George commissioned a more realistic version that included a mule borrowed from a peasant. The names of “Karolus Magnus” and “Hannibal” appear in another painting featuring this man, which shows this man pointing to the sky as his horse lifts its legs to continue a climb. Jacques-­‐Louis David painted a depiction of, for the point, French general crossing the Alps?
Answer: Napoleon I

1471. Pre-­‐Christianized Baltic mythology reveres a god of this domain called Saule, and in Hinduism, this domain is identified with the god Surya. In the 14th century BC, Amenhotep IV advanced the monotheistic worship of a god of this domain and adopted a new name based on it; that god, Aten, replaced another deity of this domain which was fused with the patron deity of Thebes, Amun. For the point, give this celestial entity worshiped in the form of deities like Ra and Helios.
Answer: the Sun (

1472. In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argued that this country should be solely agricultural. Friedrich List praised this country’s namesake System consisting of tariffs, infrastructure subsidies, and a national bank; that system was based on the work of an author from this country who wrote a Report on Manufactures. The re-­‐chartering of this country’s second national bank was vetoed by Andrew Jackson. For the point, name this country whose author Alexander Hamilton served as its first Secretary of the Treasury.
Answer: United

1473. The samosely are people who refused to leave a Zone of Alienation created by this event, for which an iron sarcophagus was built to contain the aftermath. Weather changes in Sweden led to the discovery of this event, which rendered the town of Pripyat uninhabitable. For the point, name this 1986 nuclear disaster in Soviet Ukraine.
Answer: Chernobyl nuclear meltdown (or disaster, etc.)

1474. Axel Oxenstierna ruled as chancellor after this man was fatally shot in a cavalry charge. After leading Protestant forces to victory at Breitenfeld, this man was killed at Lutzen. This “Lion of the North” was succeeded by his daughter Christina Vasa. For the point, name this Swedish king in the Thirty Years’ War.
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus (

1475. This country took five boats from a French port in the Cherbourg Project. France had refused to deliver the boats, for which this country had paid, when diplomatic relations broke after the Six-­‐Day War. Operation Wrath of God was launched after 11 members of this country’s Olympic team were killed in 1972. For the point, name this Middle Eastern country that carried out those missions via Mossad, an intelligence agency that reports to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
Answer: Israel

1476. Worshippers of Wusheng Laomu belonged to a sect named for one of these objects; they were led by Wang Lun against the Qing in a rebellion named for a “white” one of these flowers. A text named for one of these flowers begins with prayer on Vulture Peak and teaches that all can become enlightened. The most important Mahayana sutra is named for, for the point, what water plants that are held sacred in Hinduism and Buddhism?
Answer: lotus (

1477. A form of this activity called joiking [yoy-­‐king] is performed by the Sami people and was banned during their Christianization. Another form of this activity, kulning, developed in Scandinavia for use with livestock due to its ability to travel long distances. Tremolo is common in another form of this activity common in the Alps, where it can travel via echoes. Yodeling is a form of, for the point, what musical activity?
Answer: singing (

1478. This man, who was investigated by reporter Drew Pearson, beat Bernard Montgomery in the Race to Messina. Under Douglas MacArthur, this man led cavalry to suppress the Bonus Army. Before D-­‐ Day, this general led a phantom army to confuse German forces, and he directed the relief of the 101st Airborne during the Battle of the Bulge. For the point, name this American general who controversially slapped a soldier suffering from shell shock.
Answer: George Patton

1479. The guerilla group EOKA in this country was led by its first President, Makarios III, and by Georgios Grivas, an advocate of the enosis policy that would unite this country with Greece. For the point, name this Mediterranean island country where a buffer zone divides Turkish and Greek-­‐ controlled territory and a Green Line runs through its capital, Nicosia.
Answer: Republic of Cyprus Page 1

1480. Thousands of people were injured or killed in a stampede during this ruler’s coronation feast at Khodynka Field, helping earn him the epithet “Bloody.” This ruler issued the October Manifesto, establishing the first state Duma, after the 1905 Revolution. Numerous losses in both the Russo-­‐ Japanese War and World War I led this ruler to abdicate in favor of his brother Michael. For the point, name this Romanov ruler, the last Russian tsar, who was killed with his family in 1918.
Answer: Nicholas II

1481. Two years before the Battle of Little Bighorn, General George Custer led forces into South Dakota to search for this commodity, which was discovered at Sutter’s Mill in 1848. For the point, name this precious metal that the “Forty-­‐Niners” sought during a 19th century “rush” to California.
Answer: gold (

1482. The question of whether a circle and one of these shapes with the same area can be constructed with a compass and straight-­‐edge was proven impossible in 1882. Euclid proved that the diagonal of one of these shapes is irrational and equal to their side length times two to the one-­‐half power. Ben Franklin popularized “magic” arrays of numbers in this shape. For the point, name these shapes whose four sides all have the same length.
Answer: squares (

1483. Zhu De led a force of this name that was labeled for “Workers and Peasants” until after World War II; that force fought five counter-­‐encirclement campaigns against Chiang Kai-­‐shek’s Nationalists. The arrival of another force of this name in Berlin forced Hitler to commit suicide. For the point, give this colorful term for land-­‐based military forces in Bolshevik Russia and Communist China.
Answer: Red Army (

1484. The Earl of Clancarty was sent to this event after military hostilities broke out during it. This conference, which attempted to restore monarchs to their pre-­‐war thrones, was interrupted by the Hundred Days when a French emperor returned to power. Klemens von Metternich chaired, for the point, what 1814 “Congress” to restore order after the Napoleonic Wars, held in Austria?
Answer: Congress of Vienna

1485. In this country, the Interfactory Strike Committee issued 21 demands that led to the Gdansk Agreement. This country’s government was reformed after the Round Table Agreement, which included the trade union Solidarity. Pope John Paul II called for a peaceful revolution in this country, his homeland. For the point, name this European country that Lech Walesa [vah-­‐wen-­‐sah] led from Warsaw.
Answer: Republic of Poland Page 2

1486. Joseph-­‐Marie Jacquard names a type of this material with complex designs, as well as the machine used for producing it. Another highly decorative type of this material, often using floral patterns, is named for Damascus. Lowell was the site of several strikes of primarily female workers in this industry. For the point, name this kind of material often produced by weaving the fibers from linen or wool.
Answer: cloth or fabric or textiles (

1487. In this region, the port city of Magadan developed to ship mined materials from the Kolyma Gulag. A railroad named for this region once required a ferry to cross Lake Baikal and now spans the distance from Moscow to Vladivostok. For the point, name this eastern region of Russia where Stalin operated many prisons in isolated, cold conditions.
Answer: Siberia (

1488. Abraham Lincoln authored the “Spot Resolutions” questioning whether a skirmish prior to this war was on American soil. The US Navy’s blockade of Veracruz was crucial in this war, which featured the last military campaign of Santa Anna. For the point, name this 1840s war in which the United States fought its southern neighbor.
Answer: Mexican-­‐American War

1489. This man’s power was affirmed by John Lambert’s Instrument of Government shortly after this man had created and then dissolved Barebone’s Parliament. This man ruled over the Protectorate after his faction, the Roundheads, defeated the faction of Charles I in the English Civil War. For the point, name this Puritan leader and Lord Protector of England.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell

1490. In 1971, the Supreme Court unanimously overturned this man’s conviction for refusing to join the Army; in his refusal, this man cited his Muslim beliefs and the fact that he “ain’t got no quarrel with them Viet Cong.” This man opposed George Foreman in the 1974 “Rumble in the Jungle,” knocking him out in the 8th round. For the point, name this boxer, born Cassius Clay, who was known as “the Greatest” and died in 2016 after a lengthy battle with Parkinson’s.
Answer: Muhammad Ali (

1491. Former leaders of this country include Yahya Khan, who launched Operation Searchlight to counter the Awami League, and Benazir Bhutto, the first democratic female leader of a Muslim nation. Muhammad Ali Jinnah founded, for the point, what country whose “East” portion is now Bangladesh and which contests Kashmir with its neighbor, India?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan Page 3

1492. This dynasty is honored on the Mansu Hill Grand Monument, which depicts Mount Paektu. The founder of this dynasty outlined the concept of Juche [joo-­‐chay] and created a cult of personality. A member of this family was arrested attempting to visit Disneyland in Japan; that member was assassinated in Kuala Lumpur’s airport in 2016. For the point, name this ruling family of North Korea that includes Il-­‐sung, Jong-­‐il, and Jong-­‐un.
Answer: Kim family (or dynasty, etc.)

1493. Pictures of this person wearing a helmet and flak jacket in Angola helped raise awareness of landmine removal efforts. This person was killed alongside driver Henri Paul and Dodi Fayed in a car crash in a Parisian tunnel a year after her highly publicized divorce from Prince Charles. For the point, name this royal activist, the mother of British princes William and Harry.
Answer: Diana, Princess of Wales (

1494. The signing of this agreement fulfilled the Durban Platform, which called for Indian and Chinese involvement and action by the year 2020. Nicaragua, noting that the principle of voluntary national commitment did not do enough, refused to join this agreement, which was weakened in June 2017 when Donald Trump declared that the US would leave it. For the point, name this 2016 multinational agreement to reduce carbon emissions that was signed in France.
Answer: Paris Agreement (or Paris Accord

1495. During this event, the submarine B-­‐59 refused to open fire, after which Vasili Arkhipov became known as the “man who saved the world.” In the aftermath of this event, Jupiter systems were removed from Turkey and a hotline was established to improve communications between Moscow and Washington. For the point, name this October 1962 event in which Nikita Khrushchev attempted to place missiles in the Caribbean.
Answer: Cuban Missile Crisis (

1496. This American colony purchased much of its land in treaties with the Lenape tribe. To pay a debt owed to the founder’s father, Charles II granted the royal charter creating this colony, whose name means “forest land.” For the point, name this American colony, founded as a refuge for Quakers, whose cities included Philadelphia.
Answer: Pennsylvania (Colony or Province)

1497. Sources of knowledge in this country’s philosophy are known as pramanas. The grammarian Panini worked in this modern-­‐day country, whose Upanishads greatly influenced the work of Arthur Schopenhauer. For the point, name this modern country whose non-­‐violent philosophies include ahimsa and Mahatma Gandhi’s satyagraha.
Answer: Republic of India Page 4

1498. This king, called “Yes and No” for his few words, was victorious at Acre, part of the Third Crusade against Saladin. When he was imprisoned by Leopold V, his brother John stole the English throne. For the point, name this English monarch, nicknamed the “Lionheart.”
Answer: Richard I (

1499. Embellished or fake political scandals in this empire were detailed in Procopius’ Secret History. The Sassanians and this empire established the Eternal Peace, and its expansion was checked by the Seljuks at Manzikert. The Fourth Crusade was diverted and instead sacked the capital of, for the point, what empire that was once ruled by Justinian the Great from Constantinople?
Answer: Byzantine Empire (

1500. After a major defeat at Teutoburg Forest, this man shouted “Varus, give me back my legions!” and set the boundaries of his empire at the Rhine. This man owned Egypt following his victory at the Battle of Actium and the deaths of Cleopatra and this man’s rival, Mark Antony. This man was given the title princeps by the Senate in 27 BC. For the point, name this first Emperor of Rome.
Answer: Augustus Caesar (or Octavian

1501. General William Booth founded the Salvation Army in this city, where its headquarters remain. The first Methodist conference was held under John Wesley’s leadership in this city, where a statue of Wesley stands in the churchyard of a cathedral rebuilt by Christopher Wren. For the point, name this city where St. Paul’s Cathedral hosts Anglican services.
Answer: London

1502. In this modern country, a monkey with a spiraling tail is among the line-­‐figures constructed by the Nazca people. A civilization based in what is now this country was legendarily founded by Manco Capac, who established the city of Cusco. For the point, name this country, the base of power of the Inca civilization in South America.
Answer: Peru

1503. This event may have been exacerbated by merchants fleeing Trebizond. A movement in which participants whipped themselves in penance began during this event, which some blamed on Jews poisoning wells. This event was caused by flea-­‐infected rats and spread through trade routes towards the West. For the point, name this 14th century plague that killed a third of Europe.
Answer: Black Death (

1504. After the Battle of Tumu, renovations to this structure within the Ordos Desert werer deemed necessary, building upon this structure’s original function of stopping the Xiongnu people. A million Page 52017-­‐2018 IHBB Beta Bee 2017-­‐2018 Bee Round 1 people may have died building this structure when it was constructed as protection from nomadic tribes by Qin Shi Huangdi. For the point, identify this lengthy Chinese fortification.
Answer: Great Wall of China

1505. This country took five boats from a French port in the Cherbourg Project. France had refused to deliver the boats, for which this country had paid, when diplomatic relations broke after the Six-­‐Day War. Operation Wrath of God was launched after 11 members of this country’s Olympic team were killed in 1972. For the point, name this Middle Eastern country that carried out those missions via Mossad, an intelligence agency that reports to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
Answer: Israel

1506. Worshippers of Wusheng Laomu belonged to a sect named for one of these objects; they were led by Wang Lun against the Qing in a rebellion named for a “white” one of these flowers. A text named for one of these flowers begins with prayer on Vulture Peak and teaches that all can become enlightened. The most important Mahayana sutra is named for, for the point, what water plants that are held sacred in Hinduism and Buddhism?
Answer: lotus (

1507. The guerilla group EOKA in this country was led by its first President, Makarios III, and by Georgios Grivas, an advocate of the enosis policy that would unite this country with Greece. For the point, name this Mediterranean island country where a buffer zone divides Turkish and Greek-­‐ controlled territory and a Green Line runs through its capital, Nicosia.
Answer: Republic of Cyprus

1508. This ruler issued the October Manifesto, establishing the first state Duma, after the 1905 Revolution. Numerous losses in both the Russo-­‐Japanese War and World War I led this ruler to abdicate in favor of his brother Michael. For the point, name this Romanov ruler, the last Russian tsar, who was killed with his family in 1918.
Answer: Nicholas II

1509. Two years before the Battle of Little Bighorn, General George Custer led forces into South Dakota to search for this commodity, which was discovered at Sutter’s Mill in 1848. For the point, name this precious metal that the “Forty-­‐Niners” sought during a 19th century “rush” to California.
Answer: gold (

1510. Euclid proved that the diagonal of one of these shapes is irrational and equal to their side length times two to the one-­‐half power. Ben Franklin popularized “magic” arrays of numbers in this shape. For the point, name these shapes whose four sides all have the same length.
Answer: squares (

1511. A force of this name that was labeled for “Workers and Peasants” fought five counter-­‐ encirclement campaigns against Chiang Kai-­‐shek’s Nationalists. The arrival of another force of this name in Berlin forced Hitler to commit suicide. For the point, give this colorful term for land-­‐based military forces in Bolshevik Russia and Communist China.
Answer: Red Army (

1512. In this country, the Interfactory Strike Committee issued 21 demands that led to the Gdansk Agreement. This country’s government was reformed after the Round Table Agreement, which included the trade union Solidarity. Pope John Paul II called for a peaceful revolution in this country, his homeland. For the point, name this Eastern European country that Lech Walesa led from Warsaw.
Answer: Republic of Poland

1513. Joseph-­‐Marie Jacquard names a type of this material with complex designs, as well as the machine used for producing it. Another highly decorative type of this material, often using floral patterns, is named for Damascus. Lowell was the site of several strikes of primarily female workers in this industry. For the point, name this kind of material often produced by weaving the fibers from linen or wool.
Answer: cloth or fabric or textiles (

1514. In this region, the port city of Magadan developed to ship mined materials from the Kolyma Gulag. A railroad named for this region once required a ferry to cross Lake Baikal and now spans the distance from Moscow to Vladivostok. For the point, name this eastern region of Russia where Stalin operated many prisons in isolated, cold conditions.
Answer: Siberia (

1515. This man’s power was affirmed by John Lambert’s Instrument of Government shortly after this man had created and then dissolved Barebone’s Parliament. This man ruled over the Protectorate after his faction, the Roundheads, defeated the faction of Charles I in the English Civil War. For the point, name this Puritan leader and Lord Protector of England.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell Page 2

1516. When this man refused to join the army, he cited his Muslim beliefs and the fact that he “ain’t got no quarrel with them Viet Cong.” This man opposed George Foreman in the 1974 “Rumble in the Jungle,” knocking him out in the 8th round. For the point, name this boxer, born Cassius Clay, who was known as “the Greatest” and died in 2016 after a lengthy battle with Parkinson’s.
Answer: Muhammad Ali (

1517. The founder of this dynasty outlined the concept of Juche [joo-­‐chay] and created a cult of personality. A member of this family was arrested attempting to visit Disneyland in Japan; that member was assassinated in Kuala Lumpur’s airport in 2016. For the point, name this ruling family of North Korea that includes Il-­‐sung, Jong-­‐il, and Jong-­‐un.
Answer: Kim family (or dynasty, etc.)

1518. Pictures of this person wearing a helmet and flak jacket in Angola helped raise awareness of landmine removal efforts. This person was killed alongside driver Henri Paul and Dodi Fayed in a car crash in a Parisian tunnel a year after her highly publicized divorce from Prince Charles. For the point, name this royal activist, the mother of British princes William and Harry.
Answer: Diana, Princess of Wales (

1519. Nicaragua, noting that the principle of voluntary national commitment did not do enough, refused to join this agreement, which was weakened in June 2017 when Donald Trump declared that the US would leave it. For the point, name this 2016 multinational agreement to reduce carbon emissions that was signed in France.
Answer: Paris Agreement (or Paris Accord

1520. In the aftermath of this event, Jupiter systems were removed from Turkey and a hotline was established to improve communications between Moscow and Washington. For the point, name this October 1962 event in which Nikita Khrushchev attempted to place missiles in the Caribbean.
Answer: Cuban Missile Crisis (

1521. After a major defeat at Teutoburg Forest, this man set the boundaries of his empire at the Rhine. This man owned Egypt following his victory at the Battle of Actium and the deaths of Cleopatra and this man’s rival, Mark Antony. This man was given the title princeps by the Senate in 27 BC. For the point, name this first Emperor of Rome.
Answer: Augustus Caesar (or Octavian

1522. General William Booth founded the Salvation Army in this city, where its headquarters remain. The first Methodist conference was held under John Wesley’s leadership in this city, where a statue of Wesley stands in the churchyard of a cathedral rebuilt by Christopher Wren. For the point, name this city where St. Paul’s Cathedral hosts Anglican services.
Answer: London Page 3

1523. In this modern country, a monkey with a spiraling tail is among the line-­‐figures constructed by the Nazca people. A civilization based in what is now this country was legendarily founded by Manco Capac, who established the city of Cusco. For the point, name this country, the base of power of the Inca civilization in South America, where Spanish colonists built its capital of Lima.
Answer: Peru (20 Former leaders of this country include Yahya Khan and Benazir Bhutto, the first democratic female leader of a Muslim nation. Muhammad Ali Jinnah founded, for the point, what country whose “East” portion is now Bangladesh and which contests Kashmir with its neighbor, India? Islamic Republic of Pakistan

1524. This king, called “Yes and No” for his few words, was victorious at Acre, part of the Third Crusade against Saladin. When he was imprisoned by Leopold V, his brother John stole the English throne. For the point, name this English monarch, nicknamed the “Lionheart.”
Answer: Richard I (

1525. This event may have been exacerbated by merchants fleeing Trebizond. A movement in which participants whipped themselves in penance began during this event, which some blamed on Jews poisoning wells. This event was caused by flea-­‐infected rats and spread through trade routes towards the West. For the point, name this 14th century plague that killed a third of Europe.
Answer: Black Death (

1526. After the Battle of Tumu, renovations to this structure within the Ordos Desert were deemed necessary, building upon this structure’s original function of stopping the Xiongnu people. A million people may have died building this structure when it was constructed as protection from nomadic tribes by Qin Shi Huangdi. For the point, identify this lengthy Chinese fortification.
Answer: Great Wall of China

1527. Embellished or fake political scandals in this empire were detailed in Procopius’ Secret History. The Sassanians and this empire established the Eternal Peace, and its expansion was checked by the Seljuks at Manzikert. The Fourth Crusade was diverted and instead sacked the capital of, for the point, what empire that was once ruled by Justinian the Great from Constantinople?
Answer: Byzantine Empire (

1528. Sources of knowledge in this country’s philosophy are known as pramanas. The grammarian Panini worked in this modern-­‐day country, whose Upanishads greatly influenced the work of Arthur Schopenhauer. For the point, name this modern country whose non-­‐violent philosophies include ahimsa and Mahatma Gandhi’s satyagraha.
Answer: Republic of India

1529. One of this man’s admirals, Hayreddin Barbarossa, docked in Toulon thanks to his alliance with Francis I of France. This man conquered much of Hungary after the Battle of Mohacs [moh-­‐hotch]. Though this ruler oversaw a failed Siege of Malta against the Knights Hospitaller and failed to capture Vienna in 1526, he expanded his empire to its greatest extent. For the point, name this Ottoman ruler, known as “the Magnificent.”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I)

1530. A shift in this river caused the creation of Cordova Island, leading to the Chamizal border dispute and the near-­‐assassination of two presidents in 1909. The question of whether to use the Nueces [noo-­‐ays-­‐ace] River or this river to determine a border led to a war that ended with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. For the point, name this river on the US-­‐Mexico border.
Answer: Rio Grande (or Rio Bravo)

1531. In this city, attempts to train citizens in human resources management led to the creation of a fully-­‐foreign-­‐owned “Knowledge Village.” This city established free economic zones in the Internet City district and Jebel Ali Harbor. A hotel in this city is often misquoted as being rated seven stars and is shaped like a sail. The Burj Al Arab hotel and the world’s tallest building, the Burj Khalifa, are located in, for the point, what largest city of the United Arab Emirates?
Answer: Dubai

1532. In this novel, Tjaden [t’yah-­‐den] gets revenge on Himmelstoss, and another character feels remorse at the stabbing of Gerard Duval, having returned to the army from seventeen days of leave to see his family. As Fredrich Muller dies, he gives Kemmerich’s boots to this novel’s protagonist, Paul Baumer [boy-­‐mar]. For the point, name this Erich Maria Remarque novel about life in the German trenches of World War I.
Answer: All Quiet on the Western Front (

1533. The central portion of this building was surrounded by the hekhal. An earthquake in 363 AD may have prevented a project to reconstruct this building, which was expanded under Herod the Great and destroyed in 70 AD by Roman soldiers. This building’s former location is now occupied by the Dome of the Rock and the Al-­‐Aqsa Mosque. The Holy of Holies was contained in, for the point, what Jewish holy site in Jerusalem?
Answer: Holy Temple (

1534. Architectural wonders from this empire include as-­‐Saheli’s Djinguereber Mosque and Djenne’s Great Mosque. This empire was supplanted by the Songhai, and its most famous ruler legendarily devalued gold along the Mediterranean during his lavish hajj to Mecca. For the point, name this west African empire that was ruled by Mansa Musa.
Answer: Mali Empire (or Manden Kurufaba)

1535. A holder of this position fled to France after he was condemned at a trial held at Northampton Castle, prior to which he had refused to sign the Constitutions of Clarendon. Stephen Langton feuded with King John while he held this position. In 1170, King Henry II ordered the murder of the holder of this position. For the point, name this English religious position held by Thomas Becket.
Answer: Archbishop of Canterbury

1536. In this country, the Berkut police force was disbanded after a violent suppression of the “Heavenly Hundred” protesters. This country’s Independence Square was the site of the Euromaidan protests, part of a 2014 revolution that ousted Viktor Yanukovych. During the ensuing instability, this country had a Black Sea territory annexed by Vladimir Putin. For the point, name this country that lost the Crimea to neighboring Russia and is governed from Kiev.
Answer: Ukraine

1537. The GRUNK briefly held power in this nation, where intellectuals and other “New People” were executed during “Year Zero.” This country, which was ruled by King Sihanouk until his 1970 overthrow, was the site of “killing fields” during a period when it was known as Democratic Kampuchea and its Communist Party carried out purges under the direction of Pol Pot. For the point, name this Southeast Asian country once ruled by the Khmer Rouge.
Answer: Cambodia (

1538. This composer’s second collaboration with librettist Lorenzo da Ponte had its “Champagne Aria” bowdlerized by Imperial censors. For another opera by this man, Da Ponte preemptively removed an anti-­‐nobility speech from the original Pierre Beaumarchais play; in that opera, Susanna marries Count Almaviva’s servant. For the point, name this Austrian composer of Don Giovanni and The Marriage of Figaro who also wrote the serenade Eine Kleine Nachtmusik.
Answer: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

1539. This man’s autobiography, titled We, did not refer to the Ryan aircraft on the cover, but actually to his financial backers. This man won a prize from Raymond Orteig and used his fame to promote airmail. This pilot was celebrated in a 1927 ticker tape parade in New York City after he landed at La Bourget [boor-­‐zhay] airfield in Paris. For the point, name this aviator who crossed the Atlantic Ocean alone in the Spirit of St. Louis.
Answer: Charles Lindbergh Page 2

1540. Albert Sabin developed both an oral vaccine for this disease and an intense rivalry with another vaccine inventor, who asked “Could you patent the sun?” to explain why he didn’t seek profits. The March of Dimes was founded to fight this disease in 1938. Jonas Salk developed a vaccine for, for the point, what mostly eradicated disease that causes muscle weakness and afflicted Franklin Roosevelt?
Answer: poliomyelitis

1541. This world leader adopted the Sinatra Doctrine, allowing allied nations to “choose their own way.” This leader faced a coup from the hardline Gang of Eight, though it was thwarted when Boris Yeltsin gave a speech from atop a tank. This man’s reforming policies of glasnost and perestroika helped speed up the breakup of his country. For the point, name this final leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

1542. Shuttle diplomacy initiated by Henry Kissinger helped negotiate an end to this war, leading its winner to withdraw to the Purple Line. This war, which led to the downfall of Golda Meir’s government, began when an Arab alliance breached the Bar-­‐Lev line with a surprise attack. For the point, name this 1973 war in which Israel was attacked on the Jewish Day of Atonement.
Answer: Yom Kippur War (or the

1543. Italy backed out of the Paris Peace Conference after learning that this country was promised Smyrna, which this country was occupying. Benito Mussolini invaded Albania before failing in his 1940 invasion of this country, whose Metaxas Line fell to the Germans the next year. The Corfu Incident enraged, for the point, what country that was occupied by the Nazis after the fall of Athens?
Answer: Greece

1544. Popular uprisings in this city began after the student Jan Palach [yan pahl-­‐ahk], a free speech protester, set himself on fire in Wenceslas Square. During a revolution centered in this city, Antonin Novotny was replaced by the moderate Alexander Dubcek [doob-­‐check], whose attempt to create “socialism with a human face” was crushed by a Soviet invasion. A period of liberalization known as this city’s “Spring” took place in, for the point, what capital of Czechoslovakia?
Answer: Prague (

1545. During this war, a squadron of ships broke a blockade of Presque Isle Bay to reach Put-­‐in-­‐Bay; that fleet was led by Oliver Hazard Perry, who declared “We have met the enemy and they are ours” after winning this war’s Battle of Lake Erie. This war was ended a year later by the Treaty of Ghent. For the point, name this relatively inconclusive 19th century war between the British and Americans.
Answer: War of

1546. This leader edited the Ems Dispatch, triggering a war in which this leader’s country captured Napoleon III. This leader’s Minister of Education, Adalbert Falk, established state control of education via the May Laws, part of his anti-­‐Catholic Kulturkampf. The “great questions of the time” would be answered by “blood and iron” according to, for the point, what Iron Chancellor of Prussia?
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

1547. At this structure’s opening ceremony, George Nares’s Newport controversially surged past the imperial Eagle. A closure of this structure caused the Yellow Fleet to be trapped for eight years. Lester Pearson was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for mediating a 1956 conflict in which British and French paratroopers tried to reclaim it from Gamal Abdel Nasser, who had nationalized it. For the point, name this Egyptian waterway that linked the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
Answer: Suez Canal

1548. Two answers required. A demarcation line between these two countries has resulted in disputes over portions of Arunachal Pradesh. After a 1962 war, one of these nations annexed the Aksai Chin region from the other. These two nations agreed to Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, or Panchsheel, under leaders Jawaharlal Nehru and Mao Zedong. For the point, name these two countries, the two most-­‐populous in the world.
Answer: Republic of India and the People’s Republic of China (

1549. This treaty, which was negotiated at the same time as the treaties of Saint-­‐Germain and Trianon, led to the transfer of the Vistula River so that the Free City of Danzig could be established. It was panned by John Maynard Keynes, in part because of Article 231, the so-­‐called “war guilt clause” that demanded reparations from the defeated Germany. For the point, name this treaty that ended World War I.
Answer: Treaty of Versailles

1550. This leader, who was protected by the all-­‐female Amazonian Guard, claimed responsibility for the 1988 Lockerbie bombings. This man detailed his Third International Theory in the Green Book shortly before taking the title “Brotherly Leader and Guide of the Revolution.” In 2011, this leader was killed near his hometown of Sirte during the Arab Spring. For the point, name this longtime dictator of Libya.
Answer: Muammar Gaddafi (or Qaddafi)

1551. This composer set a description of Solomon’s anointing for an anthem that has been played at the coronation of every British monarch since George II. This composer of Zadok The Priest included the chorus “See the conqu’ring hero comes” in his oratorio Judas Maccabaeus. King George II supposedly began the tradition of standing during another work of this composer. For the point, name this Germanborn composer who included the “Hallelujah Chorus” in his Messiah.
Answer: George Frideric Handel Page 4

1552. This man’s party was the target of the Aventine Secession after he changed his country’s voting system with the Acerbo [uh-­‐chair-­‐bow] Law. After this man was rescued by Otto Skorzeny, he led the Republic of Salo, which relied on German forces to control the northern half of a country as Victor Emmanuel III regained power from this man in the south. For the point, name this fascist dictator who took power after his militia, called the Blackshirts, marched on Rome in 1922.
Answer: Benito Mussolini (

1553. In 2004, a US Army Ranger who had given up a career in this sport was killed by friendly fire in Afghanistan. In addition to Pat Tillman, this sport was played professionally by Junior Seau and Aaron Hernandez, each of whom were posthumously diagnosed with brain damage that results from head injuries. For the point, name this sport whose professional league has denied a link between brain damage and concussions received while playing positions like linebacker and quarterback.
Answer: (American or gridiron) football

1554. This politician, who encouraged fiscal responsibility to combat inflation in the Whip Inflation Now campaign, signed the Helsinki Accords to improve relations with communist Europe. This president declared “our long national nightmare is over” after taking office in 1974. For the point, name this US president who pardoned his predecessor, Richard Nixon.
Answer: Gerald Rudolph Ford Jr. (

1555. Soldiers raised in this city were trained on a field known as the Campus Martius, and its Temple of Janus opened its doors in times of war. This city’s sewer, the Cloaca Maxima, drained a swamp that became the site of the first forum. This city was situated on seven hills and was legendarily founded by Romulus and Remus. For the point, name this city on the Tiber River, the namesake of an Italian empire.
Answer: Rome

1556. Leland Stanford sponsored a study of these animals that Eadweard Muybridge [”edward my-­‐ bridge”] used photography to undertake. A sculpture with a nickname translating to “Honeycat” shows Erasmo da Narni on one of these animals, and was based on an earlier statue of the emperor Marcus Aurelius on military campaign. For the point, name these animals which are typically featured with famous riders in equestrian statues.
Answer: horses (

1557. Major construction of this project was only began under the leadership of Fritz Todt in 1933, though it had been proposed during the Weimar Republic. During World War II, parts of this system were converted into auxiliary airstrips by the Nazi Government. Dwight Eisenhower was inspired by the success of this system to pass the Interstate Highway Act. For the point, identify this German highway system, famous for its lack of speed limits.
Answer: autobahnen (

1558. Following protests on an excise tax on whiskey, this president sent the “Watermelon Army” to western Pennsylvania. This President’s farewell address warned against permanent alliances and was published shortly before the first contested Presidential election. For the point, name this military general and first President of the United States.
Answer: George Washington

1559. Ricardo Rossello governs this unincorporated territory, where the potential failure of the Guajataca [gwa-­‐ha-­‐ta-­‐ka] Dam in this territory prompted a mass evacuation of over 70,000 people here in 2017. For the point, name this U.S. territory with capital at San Juan that was devastated by Hurricane Maria.
Answer: Puerto Rico Page 6

1560. This man conquered much of Hungary after the Battle of Mohacs [moh-­‐hotch]. Though this ruler oversaw a failed Siege of Malta against the Knights Hospitaller and failed to capture Vienna in 1526, he expanded his empire to its greatest extent. For the point, name this Ottoman ruler, known as “the Magnificent.”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I)

1561. This city established free economic zones in the Internet City district and Jebel Ali Harbor. A hotel in this city is often misquoted as being rated seven stars and is shaped like a sail. The Burj Al Arab hotel and the world’s tallest building, the Burj Khalifa, are located in, for the point, what largest city of the United Arab Emirates?
Answer: Dubai

1562. An earthquake in 363 AD may have prevented a project to reconstruct this building, which was expanded under Herod the Great and destroyed in 70 AD by Roman soldiers. This building’s former location is now occupied by the Dome of the Rock and the Al-­‐Aqsa Mosque. The Holy of Holies was contained in, for the point, what Jewish holy site in Jerusalem?
Answer: Holy Temple (

1563. Architectural wonders from this empire include as-­‐Saheli’s Djinguereber Mosque and Djenne’s Great Mosque. This empire was supplanted by the Songhai, and its most famous ruler legendarily devalued gold along the Mediterranean during his lavish hajj to Mecca. For the point, name this west African empire that was ruled by Mansa Musa.
Answer: Mali Empire (or Manden Kurufaba)

1564. A holder of this position was condemned at a trial held at Northampton Castle, prior to which he had refused to sign the Constitutions of Clarendon. Stephen Langton feuded with King John while he held this position. In 1170, King Henry II ordered the murder of the holder of this position. For the point, name this English religious position held by Thomas Becket.
Answer: Archbishop of Canterbury

1565. This country’s Independence Square was the site of the Euromaidan protests, part of a 2014 revolution that ousted Viktor Yanukovych. During the ensuing instability, this country had a Black Sea territory annexed by Vladimir Putin. For the point, name this country that lost the Crimea to neighboring Russia and is governed from Kiev.
Answer: Ukraine Page 1

1566. This country, which was ruled by King Sihanouk until his 1970 overthrow, was the site of “killing fields” during a period when it was known as Democratic Kampuchea and its Communist Party carried out purges under the direction of Pol Pot. For the point, name this Southeast Asian country once ruled by the Khmer Rouge.
Answer: Cambodia (

1567. For an opera by this man, Da Ponte preemptively removed an anti-­‐nobility speech from the original Pierre Beaumarchais play; in that opera, Susanna marries Count Almaviva’s servant. For the point, name this Austrian composer of Don Giovanni and The Marriage of Figaro who also wrote the serenade Eine Kleine Nachtmusik.
Answer: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

1568. Albert Sabin developed both an oral vaccine for this disease and an intense rivalry with another vaccine inventor, who asked “Could you patent the sun?” to explain why he didn’t seek profits. The March of Dimes was founded to fight this disease in 1938. Jonas Salk developed a vaccine for, for the point, what mostly eradicated disease that causes muscle weakness and afflicted Franklin Roosevelt?
Answer: poliomyelitis

1569. This leader faced a coup from the hardline Gang of Eight, though it was thwarted when Boris Yeltsin gave a speech from atop a tank. This man’s reforming policies of glasnost and perestroika helped speed up the breakup of his country. For the point, name this final leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

1570. Shuttle diplomacy initiated by Henry Kissinger helped negotiate an end to this war, leading its winner to withdraw to the Purple Line. This war, which led to the downfall of Golda Meir’s government, began when an Arab alliance breached the Bar-­‐Lev line with a surprise attack. For the point, name this 1973 war in which Israel was attacked on the Jewish Day of Atonement.
Answer: Yom Kippur War (or the

1571. Italy backed out of the Paris Peace Conference after learning that this country was promised Smyrna, which this country was occupying. Benito Mussolini invaded Albania before failing in his 1940 invasion of this country, whose Metaxas Line fell to the Germans the next year. The Corfu Incident enraged, for the point, what country that was occupied by the Nazis after the fall of Athens?
Answer: Greece Page 2

1572. During a revolution centered in this city, Antonin Novotny was replaced by the moderate Alexander Dubcek [doob-­‐check], whose attempt to create “socialism with a human face” was crushed by a Soviet invasion. A period of liberalization known as this city’s “Spring” took place in, for the point, what capital of Czechoslovakia?
Answer: Prague (

1573. During this war, Oliver Hazard Perry declared “We have met the enemy and they are ours” after winning this war’s Battle of Lake Erie. This war was ended a year later by the Treaty of Ghent. For the point, name this relatively inconclusive 19th century war between the British and Americans.
Answer: War of

1574. This leader edited the Ems Dispatch, triggering a war in which this leader’s country captured Napoleon III. This leader’s Minister of Education, Adalbert Falk, established state control of education via the May Laws, part of his anti-­‐Catholic Kulturkampf. The “great questions of the time” would be answered by “blood and iron” according to, for the point, what Iron Chancellor of Prussia?
Answer: Otto von Bismarck

1575. A closure of this structure caused the Yellow Fleet to be trapped for eight years. Lester Pearson was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for mediating a 1956 conflict in which British and French paratroopers tried to reclaim it from Gamal Abdel Nasser, who had nationalized it. For the point, name this Egyptian waterway that linked the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
Answer: Suez Canal

1576. Two answers required. After a 1962 war, one of these nations annexed the Aksai Chin region from the other. These two nations agreed to Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, or Panchsheel, under leaders Jawaharlal Nehru and Mao Zedong. For the point, name these two countries, the two most-­‐populous in the world.
Answer: Republic of India and the People’s Republic of China (

1577. This treaty, which was negotiated at the same time as the treaties of Saint-­‐Germain and Trianon, led to the transfer of the Vistula River so that the Free City of Danzig could be established. It was panned by John Maynard Keynes, in part because of Article 231, the so-­‐called “war guilt clause” that demanded reparations from the defeated Germany. For the point, name this treaty that ended World War I.
Answer: Treaty of Versailles Page 3

1578. After this man was rescued by Otto Skorzeny, he led the Republic of Salo, which relied on German forces to control the northern half of a country as Victor Emmanuel III regained power from this man in the south. For the point, name this fascist dictator who took power after his militia, called the Blackshirts, marched on Rome in 1922.
Answer: Benito Mussolini (

1579. This sport was played professionally by Dave Duerson, Junior Seau, and Aaron Hernandez, each of whom were posthumously diagnosed with CTE, a form of chronic brain damage that results from numerous head injuries. For the point, name this sport whose professional league has controversially denied a link between brain damage and concussions received while playing positions like linebacker and quarterback.
Answer: (American or gridiron) football

1580. This city's Temple of Janus only opened its doors in times of war. This city’s sewer, the Cloaca Maxima, drained a swamp that became the site of the first forum. This city was situated on seven hills and was legendarily founded by Romulus and Remus. For the point, name this city on the Tiber River, the namesake of an Italian empire.
Answer: Rome

1581. Ricardo Rossello governs this unincorporated territory, where the potential failure of the Guajataca [gwa-­‐ha-­‐ta-­‐ka] Dam in this territory prompted a mass evacuation of over 70,000 people here in 2017. For the point, name this U.S. territory with capital at San Juan that was devastated by Hurricane Maria.
Answer: Puerto Rico

1582. Leland Stanford sponsored a study of these animals that Eadweard Muybridge [”edward my-­‐ bridge”] used photography to undertake. A sculpture with a nickname translating to “Honeycat” shows Erasmo da Narni on one of these animals, and was based on an earlier statue of the emperor Marcus Aurelius on military campaign. For the point, name these animals which are typically featured with famous riders in equestrian statues.
Answer: horses (

1583. During World War II, parts of this system were converted into auxiliary airstrips by the Nazi Government. Dwight Eisenhower was inspired by the success of this system to pass the Interstate Highway Act. For the point, identify this German highway system, famous for its lack of speed limits.
Answer: autobahnen (

1584. Following protests on an excise tax on whiskey, this man sent the “Watermelon Army” to western Pennsylvania. This President’s farewell address warned against permanent alliances and was published shortly before the first contested Presidential election. For the point, name this first President of the United States.
Answer: George Washington

1585. Rhys Gethin [[REES GEH-tihn]] and a national hero of this kingdom, Owain Glendower, defeated the forces of Henry IV at the Battle of Stalling Down. A ruler of this region's kingdom of Powys [[POW-iss]], Llywelyn [[loo-ELL-in]] the Last, swore fealty to Edward I following the English conquest of this modern country. For ten points, name this constituent country of the United Kingdom whose name appears in the Princely title of the heir to the English throne.
Answer: Kingdom of Wales (or Cymru

1586. This polity's ruling family came to power after its scion, Francesco the Malicious, captured its chief fortress while disguised as a Franciscan monk. In 2015, the prince of this polity apologized for its role in the deportation of 90 Jews during the Holocaust. That prince is the child of this country's Prince Rainier III and American actress Grace Kelly. The Grimaldi family has traditionally ruled, for ten points, what wealthy city-state on the Franco-Italian border known for its yearly Grand Prix?
Answer: Principality of Monaco (or Múnegu; or Principauté de Monaco; or Prinçipatu de Múnegu)

1587. According to Homer in the Odyssey, this deity was “loved more than any place on earth” on the island of Lemnos, which was traditionally the cult center of this god. An altar dedicated to this deity is sometimes referred to by the people of Elis as the altar of “warlike Zeus.” The Chalceia [[chahl-KAY-ah]] festival, in which "peplos" garments were woven from a loom, was dedicated to Athena and this deity. For ten points, what deity was the primary target of worship for Greek blacksmiths and craftsmen?
Answer: Hephaestus (or Hephaistos; do not

1588. While serving in this military force, foreigner Lodewijk [[LOHD-veeck]] van Heiden guaranteed Greek independence with his victory at Navarino. Under the promise that he would reach Constantinople, John Paul Jones joined this military branch following his service in the Revolutionary War. This branch's Black Sea Fleet suffered a devastating mutiny aboard the battleship Potemkin during a war with Japan. For ten points, name this military branch founded by Tsar Peter the Great.
Answer: Imperial Russian Navy (

1589. Propagandist Joseph Goebbels stated, "One cannot shoot with [this commodity], but with guns" in a speech justifying peacetime rationing. A challenge by Napoleon III to invent a substitute for this foodstuff for the poor led to the invention of margarine. Described by Pliny as "the most delicate of food among barbarous nations," for ten points, what is this dairy product made by churning?
Answer: Butter (

1590. This work was first shown at the 1937 Paris International Exposition. A tapestry copy of this work was first hung at the United Nations in 1985, and was covered by a large curtain for a 2003 press conference while John Negroponte and Colin Powell argued for war on Iraq. Another work titled [this piece] To Wounded Knee connects the history of this painting to anti- indigenous violence carried out by the United States government. Created in response to a 1937 bombing in the Basque Country, for ten points, what is this anti-war painting by Pablo Picasso?
Answer: Guernica

1591. Sailors from this city established the port of Parthenope [[par-THEH-noh-peh]] in Magna Graecia, eventually becoming modern Naples. Ptolemy III offered to rebuild a bronze statue which collapsed into this city-state's harbor due to a 226 BCE earthquake. For ten points, name this ancient Greek city-state off the coast of Anatolia that possessed a wonder of the ancient world, the bronze Colossus.
Answer: Rhodes (or Rhodos

1592. The historical "Sultanate of Women" period began due to the influence of this man's wife, Roxelana. Despite an overwhelming troop disparity, this man's forces failed to capture the island of Malta in 1565. This man succeeded Selim the Grim and warred with the Safavids under Tahmasp I. This victor at the Battle of Mohacs [[MOH-hahtch]] was later repelled at the 1529 Siege of Vienna. For ten points, identify this sultan of the Ottoman Empire known as “The Magnificent”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I; or Süleyman-ı Evvel; or Suleiman the Lawgiver; or Ḳānūnī Sulṭān Süleymān)

1593. This geographic feature was named after an American who died from a head injury in Panama. A quest to find golden ore led to the immortalization of this feature after a pilot and his companions spent eleven days descending the tepui in order to reach the nearby village of Kamarata. The El Río Caroní, a Flamingo monoplane atop Auyán-tepui [[ow-YAHN teh- PWEE]] near this geographical feature, was finally recovered more than 30 years after it crashed. For ten points, what geographical feature in Venezuela is the world’s tallest uninterrupted waterfall?
Answer: Angel Falls (or Salto Ángel; or Kerepakupai Vená) BONUS: While on his quest to find the city of El Dorado, what explorer possibly became the first European to view Angel Falls? Earlier this English

1594. During this war, Leonid Pasternak's charity poster of a wounded soldier leaning against a wall next to the phrase "Aid to War Victims" became an anti-war symbol. Alexander Samsonov killed himself after losing the entire Second Army in this war, during which Russia suffered losses at the Masurian Lakes and Tannenberg. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk withdrew Russia from, for ten points, what war whose devastation led to widespread popular support for the February Revolution?
Answer: World War One (or First World War

1595. These things were first theorized by George Johnston Stoney as a “fundamental unit quantity of electricity.” A theory created by John Dalton depicts the water molecule without these particles while a model created by Erwin Schrödinger presents these particles as “matter waves.” Robert A. Millikan’s oil drop experiment was successful in measuring the charge of this particle. Discovered in 1897 by British physicist J. J. Thomson, for ten points, what is this negatively charged particle integral to quantum physics?
Answer: Electrons BONUS: J. J. Thomson created what “model” that depicts negatively-charged electrons immersed in a positively-charged space, named for the dessert it resembles? Plum Pudding model

1596. Cartographers including Jehuda Cresques [[yeh-OO-dah KRES-kess]] and Pedro Nunes [[NOO-ness]] were hired by this man to convene at his alleged School of Sagres [[SAH- gresh]]. This man's personal shield bearer, Gil Eanes [[AINES]], made numerous failed attempted to pass Cape Bojador [[boh-HAH-dor]]. Supposedly sponsoring several expeditions to Madeira and the Azores, for ten points, who was this Portuguese prince known for his attempts to map the west coast of Africa?
Answer: Prince Henry the Navigator (or Infante Dom Henrique, o Navegador

1597. This country had the Bauhaus-trained Konrad Püschel redesign the damaged city of Hamhung. Holding up to 114,000 spectators, this country's Rungrado 1st of May Stadium was the largest stadium in the world until 2020 and featured events such as the Arirang Mass Gymnastics Festival. For ten points, name this Asian peninsular country that fought a war with its southern neighbor in the early 1950s.
Answer: North Korea (or Democratic People's Republic of Korea; or DPRK; or Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk

1598. Lauzun’s Legion unhorsed Banastre Tarleton during this battle. Wilhelm of the Palatinate-Zweibrucken [[ZVY-broo-ken]] captured Redoubt Number 9 during this battle, while Alexander Hamilton captured Redoubt Number 10. French forces under the Comte de Rochambeau supported American troops during this battle, which led Lord North to proclaim, “Oh God, it’s all over.” For ten points, name this last major battle of the American Revolution, which led to the surrender of Charles Cornwallis.
Answer: Battle of Yorktown (

1599. This composer's son, Maxim, supported the controversial book Testimony, which Solomon Volkov claimed were this composer's memoirs. A theme from a symphony by this composer, which inspired a song from Franz Lehar’s operetta The Merry Widow, is repeated twelve times to depict a Nazi invasion of his country. An article in Pravda accused this composer of Formalism, after which he wrote his D minor Fifth Symphony. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of the Leningrad Symphony.
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich (or Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich) BONUS: Shostakovich's 13th symphony takes its name from a poem by Yevgeny Yevtushenko [[yehv-too-SHEHN-koh]], which itself is named for Babi Yar, the site of the Nazi massacre of over one hundred thousand Jews in what Ukrainian city? Kyiv (or Kiev)

1600. Though officially called the Revolutionary Nuns, a "Guard" nicknamed for this legendary culture served under Muammar Gaddafi of Libya. Strabo [[STRAY-boh]] claimed that these people lived along the Thermodon [[THER-moh-don]] River though they had retreated beyond the realm of the Gargareans [[gar-GAR-ee-ans]] with whom these people reproduced children. Legendarily led by Penthesilea [[pen-theh-sih-LAY-uh]] during the Attic War, for ten points, what was this culture of warrior women who may have lived in Scythia [[SIH-thee-ah]]?
Answer: Amazons (

1601. Founded Standard Oil and is widely considered the wealthiest American of all time.
Answer: John D(avison) Rockefeller

1602. Was known as "The Commodore" and made his fortune in steamship lines before forming the New York Central railroad.
Answer: Cornelius Vanderbilt

1603. Resolved the Panic of 1907 with his personal wealth and helped consolidate U.S. Steel and General Electric.
Answer: J. P. Morgan (or John Pierpont Morgan)

1604. Served as president of both the Central Pacific and Southern Pacific Railroads and founded a university near Palo Alto.
Answer: Leland Stanford (or Amasa Leland Stanford)

1605. Founded the American Tobacco Company and endowed a university in Durham, North Carolina.
Answer: James Buchanan Duke (

1606. Attempted to corner the gold market with James Fisk, leading to the 1869 Black Friday panic.
Answer: Jay Gould (or Jason Gould)

1607. Leading country of the alliance that formed the Iron Curtain in Eastern Europe.
Answer: Soviet Union (or Sovetsky Soyuz

1608. Carpathian nation that was overrun by Warsaw Pact forces following a revolt in its capital of Budapest.
Answer: Hungary (or Magyarország

1609. Czechoslovak city whose liberalizing "Spring" was crushed by the Warsaw Pact.
Answer: Prague (or Praha

1610. "Genius of the Carpathians" and Romanian dictator who was executed by firing squad on Christmas in 1989.
Answer: Nicolae Ceaușescu [[chow-CHEH-skyoo]]

1611. East German First Secretary who approved the building of the Berlin Wall.
Answer: Walter Ulbricht (or Walter Ernst Paul Ulbricht)

1612. Leader of Communist Albania whose move toward Maoism caused a full break with the Warsaw Pact.
Answer: Enver Hoxha [[HOH-juh]] (or Enver Halil Hoxha)

1613. Language of the Roman Empire, whose Ecclesiastical form is still used by the Catholic Church.
Answer: Classical Latin (

1614. Language family spoken by a few indigenous people on Hokkaido, Honshu, and other Japanese islands.
Answer: Ainu language (or Ainuic)

1615. Language family of northwestern Europe that included Gaulish, Gallaecian, and Brittonic.
Answer: Celtic Languages

1616. Semitic language of the Levant that is commonly called the "language spoken by Jesus."
Answer: Aramaic (or Aramaya)

1617. Romance language named for a region of the Adriatic Sea coast whose last speaker died in an explosion near Dubrovnik.
Answer: Dalmatian (

1618. Language of southwestern England which was revived by linguists in the 20th century.
Answer: Cornish (

1619. This scientist worked under John Randall's biophysics unit while on a three- year Turner & Newall Fellowship at King's College London. An article titled “The Structure of Viruses as (+) Determined by X-Ray Diffraction,” was the last publication of this scientist. Raymond Gosling, a student working under this scientist and Maurice Wilkins, captured Photo 51, an image (*) critical in understanding molecular structure. For ten points, name this woman who was influential in discovering the double-helix structure of DNA.
Answer: Rosalind Franklin (or Rosalind Elsie Franklin)

1620. This body of water, home to the Eora and Tharawal people for thousands of years, is the location to which Maggie May is sent after “robbing a homeward bounder" in a Liverpool folk song. Arthur Phillip was assigned to establish a British (+) colony at this location but opted to settle at Port Jackson. James Cook initially referred to this location as “Stingrays Harbour,” (*) and this body of water was his first landing site in Australia after sailing from New Zealand. For ten points, what bay in Sydney did the British establish as a penal colony?
Answer: Botany Bay (or Kamay

1621. Many of this artist's surviving illustrations are collected in the Codex Arundel and the Codex Atlanticus. Giorgio Vasari may have painted over a lost painting by this artist of four men riding raging war horses during the Battle of Anghiari. Christ (+) holds an orb in his left hand in a painting by this artist that sold at auction for $450 million in 2017. This artist likely chose a noblewoman from the Gherardini family as (*) the subject of his one of his best known paintings. For ten points, name this painter of Salvator Mundi and the Mona Lisa.
Answer: Leonardo da Vinci (

1622. After a task force led by Titus Quinctius [[KWIN-tee-ooss]] Flamininus [[flah- MEE-nee-ooss]] discovered his location in Bithynia [[bih-THIH-nee-ah]], this general (+) ingested poison according to Livy. Earlier, this brother of Mago won several devastating victories at Lake Trasimene [[trah-see-MEH-neh]] and Cannae [[KAH-nay]] before being defeated during a counter-invasion of (*) North Africa. Scipio's victory at Zama led to, for ten points, which general's defeat in the Second Punic War?
Answer: Hannibal Barca

1623. Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Arthur Krock helped redraft this man's thesis, "Appeasement At Munich," into a book examining the failures of the (+) British government to take steps to prevent World War Two called Why England Slept. In that book by this author, he analyzed figures including Lucius Lamar, Thomas Hart (*) Benton, and Sam Houston. For ten points, name this American president who included eight biographies of U.S. senators in his book Profiles in Courage.
Answer: John F. Kennedy (or John Fitzgerald Kennedy; or Jack Kennedy

1624. This man's time as a barrister included his handling of the "Caucus Case" involving supposedly rigged municipal elections in Bombay. He's not Woodrow Wilson, but this man proposed his Fourteen Points in response to the Simon Commission. Stanley Wolpert's biography (+) on this man became the basis for a 1998 biopic which controversially starred Christopher Lee. In the Lahore Resolution, an organization led by this man called for the creation of a (*) Muslim state separate from India. For ten points, name this leader of the Muslim League and founder of Pakistan.
Answer: Muhammad Ali Jinnah (or Mahomedali Jinnahbhai)

1625. Details of this event were first revealed in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle. Some of the men involved in planning this event battled the Sheriff of Worcester [[WOO-ster]] at Holbeche [["HOLE"-beech]] House, where this event’s leader, (+) Robert Catesby [[KATES-bee]], was killed. Eight of the conspirators involved in this event were convicted at a subsequent trial, including (*) Guy Fawkes. For ten points, name this failed plan to destroy the House of Lords and assassinate King James I.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot (or Gunpowder Treason Plot

1626. After his victory at the Battle of Mount Algidus [[al-GEE-dooss]], a semi- mythological character returned to this occupation after a stint as dictator. The Lex Manciana of North Africa was a 2nd century edict which regulated the maximum number of (+) tenants in this job and how many days people in this occupation, which included Cincinnatus, needed to (*) plow per month. The writer Columella wrote On Rural Affairs concerning, for ten points, which profession responsible for producing crops?
Answer: Farmers (

1627. A Labor tax to force Xhosa [[HOH-sah]] men into employment on commercial farms, called the Glen Grey Act, was passed by this politician while he headed one colony. A turn-of-the-20th century political (+) cartoon depicts this figure standing over the continent of Africa, representing the prospective Cape to Cairo railway. The modern nations of Zimbabwe (*) and Zambia were once named for, for ten points, what British entrepreneur who names a scholarship that provides a full tuition to Oxford?
Answer: Cecil John Rhodes (

1628. Following the arrival of the Dartmouth this man and James Otis distributed the "circular letter" to organize a meeting at Faneuil [[FAN-yoo-il]] Hall. Many years after his best known action, this man succeeded John Hancock to become the fourth governor of Massachusetts. For ten points, name this American Founding Father and leader of the Sons of Liberty who orchestrated the Boston Tea Party.
Answer: Samuel Adams (

1629. This polity's ruling family came to power after its scion, Francesco the Malicious, captured its chief fortress while disguised as a Franciscan monk. In 2015, the prince of this polity apologized for its role in the deportation of 90 Jews during the Holocaust. That prince is the child of this country's Prince Rainier III and American actress Grace Kelly. The Grimaldi family has traditionally ruled, for ten points, what wealthy city-state on the Franco-Italian border known for its yearly Grand Prix?
Answer: Principality of Monaco (or Múnegu; or Principauté de Monaco; or Prinçipatu de Múnegu)

1630. According to Homer in the Odyssey, this deity was “loved more than any place on earth” on the island of Lemnos, which was traditionally the cult center of this god. An altar dedicated to this deity is sometimes referred to by the people of Elis as the altar of “warlike Zeus.” The Chalceia [[chahl-KAY-ah]] festival, in which "peplos" garments were woven from a loom, was dedicated to Athena and this deity. For ten points, what deity was the primary target of worship for Greek blacksmiths and craftsmen?
Answer: Hephaestus (or Hephaistos; do not

1631. While serving in this military force, foreigner Lodewijk [[LOHD-veeck]] van Heiden guaranteed Greek independence with his victory at Navarino. Under the promise that he would reach Constantinople, John Paul Jones joined this military branch following his service in the Revolutionary War. This branch's Black Sea Fleet suffered a devastating mutiny aboard the battleship Potemkin during a war with Japan. For ten points, name this military branch founded by Tsar Peter the Great.
Answer: Imperial Russian Navy (

1632. Propagandist Joseph Goebbels stated, "One cannot shoot with [this commodity], but with guns" in a speech justifying peacetime rationing. A challenge by Napoleon III to invent a substitute for this foodstuff for the poor led to the invention of margarine. Described by Pliny as "the most delicate of food among barbarous nations," for ten points, what is this dairy product made by churning?
Answer: Butter (

1633. Teenagers dressed like this man and formed neighborhood gangs in a namesake 1950s subculture in the Belgian Congo. A Beatles song inspired by the "Bungalow" version of this man asks him, “What did you kill?” In the musical Annie Get Your Gun, this man attempts to persuade Annie Oakley to join his company in the song, “There’s No Business Like Show Business.” For ten points, what American showman was famed for his cowboy- themed Wild West show?
Answer: Buffalo Bill (or William Frederick Cody

1634. Sailors from this city established the port of Parthenope [[par-THEH-noh-peh]] in Magna Graecia, eventually becoming modern Naples. Ptolemy III offered to rebuild a bronze statue which collapsed into this city-state's harbor due to a 226 BCE earthquake. For ten points, name this ancient Greek city-state off the coast of Anatolia that possessed a wonder of the ancient world, the bronze Colossus.
Answer: Rhodes (or Rhodos

1635. The historical "Sultanate of Women" period began due to the influence of this man's wife, Roxelana. Despite an overwhelming troop disparity, this man's forces failed to capture the island of Malta in 1565. This man succeeded Selim the Grim and warred with the Safavids under Tahmasp I. This victor at the Battle of Mohacs [[MOH-hahtch]] was later repelled at the 1529 Siege of Vienna. For ten points, identify this sultan of the Ottoman Empire known as “The Magnificent”
Answer: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I; or Süleyman-ı Evvel; or Suleiman the Lawgiver; or Ḳānūnī Sulṭān Süleymān)

1636. Rhys Gethin [[REES GEH-tihn]] and a national hero of this kingdom, Owain Glendower, defeated the forces of Henry IV at the Battle of Stalling Down. A ruler of this region's kingdom of Powys [[POW-iss]], Llywelyn [[loo-ELL-in]] the Last, swore fealty to Edward I following the English conquest of this modern country. For ten points, name this constituent country of the United Kingdom whose name appears in the Princely title of the heir to the English throne.
Answer: Kingdom of Wales (or Cymru

1637. This work was first shown at the 1937 Paris International Exposition. A tapestry copy of this work was first hung at the United Nations in 1985, and was covered by a large curtain for a 2003 press conference while John Negroponte and Colin Powell argued for war on Iraq. Another work titled [this piece] To Wounded Knee connects the history of this painting to anti-indigenous violence carried out by the United States government. Created in response to a 1937 bombing in the Basque Country, for ten points, what is this anti-war painting by Pablo Picasso?
Answer: Guernica

1638. This geographic feature was named after an American who died from a head injury in Panama. A quest to find golden ore led to the immortalization of this feature after a pilot and his companions spent eleven days descending the tepui in order to reach the nearby village of Kamarata. The El Río Caroní, a Flamingo monoplane atop Auyán-tepui [[ow-YAHN teh-PWEE]] near this geographical feature, was finally recovered more than 30 years after it crashed. For ten points, what geographical feature in Venezuela is the world’s tallest uninterrupted waterfall?
Answer: Angel Falls (or Salto Ángel; or Kerepakupai Vená) BONUS: While on his quest to find the city of El Dorado, what explorer possibly became the first European to view Angel Falls? Earlier this English

1639. During this war, Leonid Pasternak's charity poster of a wounded soldier leaning against a wall next to the phrase "Aid to War Victims" became an anti-war symbol. Alexander Samsonov killed himself after losing the entire Second Army in this war, during which Russia suffered losses at the Masurian Lakes and Tannenberg. The Treaty of Brest- Litovsk withdrew Russia from, for ten points, what war whose devastation led to widespread popular support for the February Revolution?
Answer: World War One (or First World War

1640. These things were first theorized by George Johnston Stoney as a “fundamental unit quantity of electricity.” A theory created by John Dalton depicts the water molecule without these particles while a model created by Erwin Schrödinger presents these particles as “matter waves.” Robert A. Millikan’s oil drop experiment was successful in measuring the charge of this particle. Discovered in 1897 by British physicist J. J. Thomson, for ten points, what is this negatively charged particle integral to quantum physics?
Answer: Electrons BONUS: J. J. Thomson created what “model” that depicts negatively-charged electrons immersed in a positively-charged space, named for the dessert it resembles? Plum Pudding model

1641. Cartographers including Jehuda Cresques [[yeh-OO-dah KRES-kess]] and Pedro Nunes [[NOO-ness]] were hired by this man to convene at his alleged School of Sagres [[SAH-gresh]]. This man's personal shield bearer, Gil Eanes [[AINES]], made numerous failed attempted to pass Cape Bojador [[boh-HAH-dor]]. Supposedly sponsoring several expeditions to Madeira and the Azores, for ten points, who was this Portuguese prince known for his attempts to map the west coast of Africa?
Answer: Prince Henry the Navigator (or Infante Dom Henrique, o Navegador

1642. This country had the Bauhaus-trained Konrad Püschel redesign the damaged city of Hamhung. Holding up to 114,000 spectators, this country's Rungrado 1st of May Stadium was the largest stadium in the world until 2020 and featured events such as the Arirang Mass Gymnastics Festival. For ten points, name this Asian peninsular country that fought a war with its southern neighbor in the early 1950s.
Answer: North Korea (or Democratic People's Republic of Korea; or DPRK; or Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk

1643. Lauzun’s Legion unhorsed Banastre Tarleton during this battle. Wilhelm of the Palatinate-Zweibrucken [[ZVY-broo-ken]] captured Redoubt Number 9 during this battle, while Alexander Hamilton captured Redoubt Number 10. French forces under the Comte de Rochambeau supported American troops during this battle, which led Lord North to proclaim, “Oh God, it’s all over.” For ten points, name this last major battle of the American Revolution, which led to the surrender of Charles Cornwallis.
Answer: Battle of Yorktown (

1644. This composer's son, Maxim, supported the controversial book Testimony, which Solomon Volkov claimed were this composer's memoirs. A theme from a symphony by this composer, which inspired a song from Franz Lehar’s operetta The Merry Widow, is repeated twelve times to depict a Nazi invasion of his country. An article in Pravda accused this composer of Formalism, after which he wrote his D minor Fifth Symphony. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of the Leningrad Symphony.
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich (or Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich) BONUS: Shostakovich's 13th symphony takes its name from a poem by Yevgeny Yevtushenko [[yehv-too-SHEHN-koh]], which itself is named for Babi Yar, the site of the Nazi massacre of over one hundred thousand Jews in what Ukrainian city? Kyiv (or Kiev)

1645. Though officially called the Revolutionary Nuns, a "Guard" nicknamed for this legendary culture served under Muammar Gaddafi of Libya. Strabo [[STRAY-boh]] claimed that these people lived along the Thermodon [[THER-moh-don]] River though they had retreated beyond the realm of the Gargareans [[gar-GAR-ee-ans]] with whom these people reproduced children. Legendarily led by Penthesilea [[pen-theh-sih-LAY-uh]] during the Attic War, for ten points, what was this culture of warrior women who may have lived in Scythia [[SIH-thee-ah]]?
Answer: Amazons (

1646. Founded Standard Oil and is widely considered the wealthiest American of all time.
Answer: John D(avison) Rockefeller

1647. Was known as "The Commodore" and made his fortune in steamship lines before forming the New York Central railroad.
Answer: Cornelius Vanderbilt

1648. Resolved the Panic of 1907 with his personal wealth and helped consolidate U.S. Steel and General Electric.
Answer: J. P. Morgan (or John Pierpont Morgan)

1649. Served as president of both the Central Pacific and Southern Pacific Railroads and founded a university near Palo Alto.
Answer: Leland Stanford (or Amasa Leland Stanford)

1650. Founded the American Tobacco Company and endowed a university in Durham, North Carolina.
Answer: James Buchanan Duke (

1651. Attempted to corner the gold market with James Fisk, leading to the 1869 Black Friday panic.
Answer: Jay Gould (or Jason Gould)

1652. Was a Canadian-American nicknamed "The Empire Builder" and controlled the Great Northern Railway and the Northern Pacific Railroad.
Answer: James Hill (or James Jerome Hill)

1653. Survived an assassination attempt during the Homestead Strike and made modifications to the South Fork Dam leading to the Johnstown Flood.
Answer: Henry Clay Frick

1654. Leading country of the alliance that formed the Iron Curtain in Eastern Europe.
Answer: Soviet Union (or Sovetsky Soyuz

1655. Carpathian nation that was overrun by Warsaw Pact forces following a revolt in its capital of Budapest.
Answer: Hungary (or Magyarország

1656. Czechoslovak city whose liberalizing "Spring" was crushed by the Warsaw Pact.
Answer: Prague (or Praha

1657. "Genius of the Carpathians" and Romanian dictator who was executed by firing squad on Christmas in 1989.
Answer: Nicolae Ceaușescu [[chow-CHEH-skyoo]]

1658. East German First Secretary who approved the building of the Berlin Wall.
Answer: Walter Ulbricht (or Walter Ernst Paul Ulbricht)

1659. Leader of Communist Albania whose move toward Maoism caused a full break with the Warsaw Pact.
Answer: Enver Hoxha [[HOH-juh]] (or Enver Halil Hoxha)

1660. Longest-serving national leader in the Warsaw Pact, leading Bulgaria for 35 years.
Answer: Todor Zhivkov (or Todor Hristov Zhivkov)

1661. Last leader of the Polish People's Republic who implemented martial law in the early 1980s.
Answer: Wojciech Jaruzelski (or Wojciech Witold Jaruzelski)

1662. Language of the Roman Empire, whose Ecclesiastical form is still used by the Catholic Church.
Answer: Classical Latin (

1663. Language family spoken by a few indigenous people on Hokkaido, Honshu, and other Japanese islands.
Answer: Ainu language (or Ainuic)

1664. Language family of northwestern Europe that included Gaulish, Gallaecian, and Brittonic.
Answer: Celtic Languages

1665. Semitic language of the Levant that is commonly called the "language spoken by Jesus."
Answer: Aramaic (or Aramaya)

1666. Romance language named for a region of the Adriatic Sea coast whose last speaker died in an explosion near Dubrovnik.
Answer: Dalmatian (

1667. Language of southwestern England which was revived by linguists in the 20th century.
Answer: Cornish (

1668. Arawakan language once spoken in the Greater Antilles originating words like "barbecue," "tobacco," and "savannah."
Answer: Classic Taíno

1669. Non-spoken mode with which the newly-revived language of Silbo on the Canary Islands is communicated.
Answer: Whistle (

1670. This scientist worked under John Randall's biophysics unit while on a three- year Turner & Newall Fellowship at King's College London. An article titled “The Structure of Viruses as (+) Determined by X-Ray Diffraction,” was the last publication of this scientist. Raymond Gosling, a student working under this scientist and Maurice Wilkins, captured Photo 51, an image (*) critical in understanding molecular structure. For ten points, name this woman who was influential in discovering the double-helix structure of DNA.
Answer: Rosalind Franklin (or Rosalind Elsie Franklin)

1671. This body of water, home to the Eora and Tharawal people for thousands of years, is the location to which Maggie May is sent after “robbing a homeward bounder" in a Liverpool folk song. Arthur Phillip was assigned to establish a British (+) colony at this location but opted to settle at Port Jackson. James Cook initially referred to this location as “Stingrays Harbour,” (*) and this body of water was his first landing site in Australia after sailing from New Zealand. For ten points, what bay in Sydney did the British establish as a penal colony?
Answer: Botany Bay (or Kamay

1672. Many of this artist's surviving illustrations are collected in the Codex Arundel and the Codex Atlanticus. Giorgio Vasari may have painted over a lost painting by this artist of four men riding raging war horses during the Battle of Anghiari. Christ (+) holds an orb in his left hand in a painting by this artist that sold at auction for $450 million in 2017. This artist likely chose a noblewoman from the Gherardini family as (*) the subject of his one of his best known paintings. For ten points, name this painter of Salvator Mundi and the Mona Lisa.
Answer: Leonardo da Vinci (

1673. After a task force led by Titus Quinctius [[KWIN-tee-ooss]] Flamininus [[flah- MEE-nee-ooss]] discovered his location in Bithynia [[bih-THIH-nee-ah]], this general (+) ingested poison according to Livy. Earlier, this brother of Mago won several devastating victories at Lake Trasimene [[trah-see-MEH-neh]] and Cannae [[KAH- nay]] before being defeated during a counter-invasion of (*) North Africa. Scipio's victory at Zama led to, for ten points, which general's defeat in the Second Punic War?
Answer: Hannibal Barca

1674. Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Arthur Krock helped redraft this man's thesis, "Appeasement At Munich," into a book examining the failures of the (+) British government to take steps to prevent World War Two called Why England Slept. In that book by this author, he analyzed figures including Lucius Lamar, Thomas Hart (*) Benton, and Sam Houston. For ten points, name this American president who included eight biographies of U.S. senators in his book Profiles in Courage.
Answer: John F. Kennedy (or John Fitzgerald Kennedy; or Jack Kennedy

1675. This man's time as a barrister included his handling of the "Caucus Case" involving supposedly rigged municipal elections in Bombay. He's not Woodrow Wilson, but this man proposed his Fourteen Points in response to the Simon Commission. Stanley Wolpert's biography (+) on this man became the basis for a 1998 biopic which controversially starred Christopher Lee. In the Lahore Resolution, an organization led by this man called for the creation of a (*) Muslim state separate from India. For ten points, name this leader of the Muslim League and founder of Pakistan.
Answer: Muhammad Ali Jinnah (or Mahomedali Jinnahbhai)

1676. Details of this event were first revealed in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle. Some of the men involved in planning this event battled the Sheriff of Worcester [[WOO-ster]] at Holbeche [["HOLE"-beech]] House, where this event’s leader, (+) Robert Catesby [[KATES-bee]], was killed. Eight of the conspirators involved in this event were convicted at a subsequent trial, including (*) Guy Fawkes. For ten points, name this failed plan to destroy the House of Lords and assassinate King James I.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot (or Gunpowder Treason Plot

1677. After his victory at the Battle of Mount Algidus [[al-GEE-dooss]], a semi- mythological character returned to this occupation after a stint as dictator. The Lex Manciana of North Africa was a 2nd century edict which regulated the maximum number of (+) tenants in this job and how many days people in this occupation, which included Cincinnatus, needed to (*) plow per month. The writer Columella wrote On Rural Affairs concerning, for ten points, which profession responsible for producing crops?
Answer: Farmers (

1678. A Labor tax to force Xhosa [[HOH-sah]] men into employment on commercial farms, called the Glen Grey Act, was passed by this politician while he headed one colony. A turn-of-the-20th century political (+) cartoon depicts this figure standing over the continent of Africa, representing the prospective Cape to Cairo railway. The modern nations of Zimbabwe (*) and Zambia were once named for, for ten points, what British entrepreneur who names a scholarship that provides a full tuition to Oxford?
Answer: Cecil John Rhodes (

1679. To denounce the atrocities committed in this present-day country's war of independence, Archer Blood wrote a namesake telegram to the U.S. State Department. George Harrison and Ravi Shankar organized a benefit concert at Madison Square Garden in support of refugees in this country, which in 2013 witnessed the death of over eleven hundred people in the world's deadliest garment factory disaster. For ten points, name this densely populated country in South Asia which broke away from Pakistan in 1971.
Answer: Bangladesh (or People's Republic of Bangladesh; or Gônoprojatontrī Bangladesh)

1680. In 1791, the HMS Pandora broke on this geographical feature, killing 35 sailors. Discovered in 1768 by French explorer Louis de Bougainville, this geographic feature was the site of a major shipwreck for the HMS Endeavour, captained by James Cook, which was only able to break away due to a high tide. In 2018, the National Geographic said half of this place was dead, “Akin to a forest after a devastating fire.” For thousands of years, Torres Islanders and Aboriginal peoples have been using, for ten points, what coral system off the coast of Queensland, Australia?
Answer: Great Barrier Reef

1681. A composer from this musical era, Heinrich Biber [[BEE-buh]], called for strings to play col legno to evoke the sounds of battle in the opening of Battalia. Another composer from this era, who wrote the music for The Bourgeois Gentleman, died by stabbing himself with a conducting staff. The all-female ensemble of the Ospedale Della Pieta orphanage often sang music by a composer from this era who wrote four concerti grossi depicting changing weather throughout the year. For ten points, name this classical music era of Jean-Baptiste Lully, Antonio Vivaldi, and Johann Sebastian Bach.
Answer: Baroque era

1682. Following the Bolshevik Revolution, an alternative version of this character was banned for being too “bourgeois,” with Joseph Stalin instead uplifting the Slavic "Ded Moroz." Jerry Rubin mocked the House Un-American Activities Committee by holding a toy rifle while dressed as this character. Thomas Nast depicted this character draped with the American flag and holding a puppet that resembled Jefferson Davis. For ten points, what character, based on a historical saint, is known for giving presents to children during Christmas?
Answer: Santa Claus (or Kris Kringle

1683. The merger of the Sveno and the Bolshevik Workers Party into the Fatherland Front overthrew this nation's monarchy following a Soviet invasion. This European nation lost the Second Balkan War against its former allies of Serbia and Greece, losing territory in Macedonia and Thrace. Tsars such as Ferdinand I and Boris III led, for ten points, what member of the Axis governed from the city of Sofia?
Answer: Tsardom of Bulgaria (or Tsarstvo Balgariya

1684. During this war, future Stasi head Erich Mielke [[MEEL-kuh]] was a major participant in the killing of about 7000 priests during a "red terror." During this war, Emilio Mola Vidal may have coined the term "fifth column" to refer to hidden supporters within a target territory. The Abraham Lincoln Brigades were composed of American volunteers who fought for the Republican side in this war, during which the Falangists allowed the Nazi Condor Legion to bomb Guernica. For ten points, name this 1930s war which ended with Francisco Franco establishing a fascist regime.
Answer: Spanish Civil War (or Guerra Civil Española)

1685. NASA’s future missions include launching the Dragonfly spacecraft to a feature of this celestial body to investigate its possible habitability. One of this planet’s moons was determined to be habitable after the Cassini space probe found evidence of geysers. An anagram that describes a feature of this planet as a “thin, flat ring” was published by Christian Huygens [[HOY-gehns]] in 1655. In 1610, Galileo Galilei observed the extensive ring system of, for ten points, what gas giant, the second largest planet in the solar system?
Answer: Saturn

1686. This ruler formally ended imperial funding for the Neoplatonic Academy, which had been revived by Emperor Theodosius the Younger. In the text The Buildings, Procopius falsely attributes the construction of walls in Edessa and Tomis to this patron of his rather than to this man's uncle and predecessor of a similar name. The unpopularity of taxes raised by this monarch and his advisor, John the Cappadocian, led to the Nika [[NEE-kah]] Riots. The Corpus Juris Civilis was compiled by, for ten points, what sixth century Byzantine emperor who married Theodora?
Answer: Justinian the Great (

1687. A “Renaissance” among these people followed the overthrow of the Gutians [[GOO- tee-ans]]. The Stele [[STEE-lee]] of the Vultures commemorates the victory of Lagash [[LAY- gash]] over Umma, both cities founded by these people. Scenes of war and daily life are shown on the Standard of Ur, created by these people. These people were the first to build step- pyramid temples called ziggurats. For ten points, name this earliest civilization to spring up in Mesopotamia.
Answer: Sumerians BONUS: The Gutians initially overthrew the Akkadian Empire, which was founded by this conqueror. He is often considered the first "Emperor" in history. Sargon the Great (or Sargon of Akkad

1688. A man from this province, who successfully argued to be made an exemplar of clemency, expressed wonder at wealthy Romans coveting "poor huts." In this Roman province, Cartimandua [[kahr-tee-mahn-DOO-ah]] of the Brigantes [[bree-GAHN-tehs]] received and handed over the rebel leader Caratacus [[kah-rah-TAH-kooss]]. A generation later, Suetonius Paulinus put down a revolt in this region by defeating the Iceni [["eye"-SEE- nee]] at Watling Street. For ten points, name this Roman province where Boudica's [[BOO- dih-kahs]] revolt occurred and of which the northern boundary was marked by Hadrian's Wall.
Answer: Britannia (or Roman Britain; do not

1689. The constitution of this nation that was in place until 1987 was written by U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt. After this country's president ordered the mass execution of prisoners in 1915, he was killed by a mob, leading to a U.S. occupation. Toussaint L'Ouverture [[too-SAHN loh-vehr-TOOR]] is known as the father of this country for leading it to independence. For ten points, name this country whose President Jovenel Moïse [[jove-NEL moh-EEZ]] was assassinated in 2021.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (or Republique d'Haiti; or Repiblik d Ayiti) BONUS: This family led Haiti from

1690. This man put the Lord Chamberlain in charge of theatre censorship after passing the Licensing Act. This man was a member of a social organization that met at Trumpet’s Tavern known as the “Kit-Kat Club.” News of the failed Battle of Cartagena [[car-tah-HEH-nah]] de Indias, which was part of the War of Jenkins' Ear, catalyzed the political downfall of this man. For ten points, identify this politician who came to power following the collapse of the South Sea Bubble and who is generally considered to be the first British prime minister.
Answer: Robert Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford (

1691. A September 2021 report found that employees of this organization, which opened a 100 million dollar "hub" in Berlin, perpetrated sexual abuse in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during its 2018 to 2020 mission in that country. This organization's director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus [[ah-dah-NAHM geh-breh-YEH-sooss]] of Ethiopia, was accused of allowing China veto power over its report on the origins of the Covid-19 virus. For ten points, name this United Nations organ that oversees disease intervention and advocates for expanded medical care.
Answer: World Health Organization (

1692. This man starred in a series of commercials for Paul Masson [[mah-SOHN]] with the slogan "We will sell no wine before its time." This man was infamously angered while recording a commercial for Findus frozen peas. In one film, a character played by this man erroneously states at the Vienna Riesenrad [[REE-zen-rahd]] that the Swiss had "five hundred years of democracy and peace" and produced only the cuckoo clock. For ten points, name this actor who portrayed Harry Lime in The Third Man and wrote and starred in Citizen Kane.
Answer: Orson Welles (or George Orson Welles) BONUS: Orson Welles founded this repertory company in New York that produced multiple stage and radio theatre productions including the "War of the Worlds” broadcast. This company notably staged a fascist-themed production of Julius Caesar in

1693. This case's subject based his legal argument on precedents such as Winny v. Whitesides and Rachel v. Walker. The grocer Samuel Russell falsely testified that he hired the central person in this case. In this case, Chief Justice Taney [[TAW-nee]] stripped Congress of its power to ban slavery in the territories, nullifying the principle of "once free, always free." For ten points, name this 1857 Supreme Court case which ruled that Black people in the United States lacked citizenship rights.
Answer: Dred Scott v. John F.A. Sandford (

1694. A group described by this color faced a six-day siege conducted by a volunteer army raised by by Toqto’a. A leader of a group described by this color was a merchant who sold salt illegally before amassing a 10,000 man force and leading an attack on Taizhou; that man was Zhang Sicheng. A man who had, as a child, been sent to a Buddhist monastery near Haozhou joined that movement described by this color. That man, Zhou Yuanzhang, would later become the Hongwu Emperor. For ten points, a group described as wearing headgear of what color rebelled against the Yuan Dynasty?
Answer: red (

1695. Civil Rights leader he called "a chump" for supporting Black integration into white society.
Answer: Martin Luther King Jr. (

1696. Abrahamic faith to which he converted before changing his name to Malik El- Shabazz.
Answer: Islam (

1697. Boxer once known as Cassius Clay whom he assisted in converting from Christianity.
Answer: Muhammad Ali

1698. Black Supremacist and leader of the NOI who later claimed to have ordered his killing.
Answer: Louis Farrakhan (

1699. Author of the book Roots who co-wrote his autobiography.
Answer: Alex Haley (or Alexander Murray Palmer Haley)

1700. Controversial five-word phrase he used to positively describe the JFK assassination.
Answer: "Chickens Coming Home to Roost"

1701. Type of peasant who was tied to the land they farmed under feudalism.
Answer: Serfs (

1702. Crop which, along with rye and barley, was used in bread-making.
Answer: Wheat (

1703. Castrated bulls used by farmers to plow agricultural fields.
Answer: Oxen (

1704. Legal term for land ownership, now commonly used for an indefinite academic appointment at a university.
Answer: Tenure (

1705. "System" used by farmers in which one-half of the land lay fallow and the other was planted.
Answer: Two-field System

1706. Century of the "Great Famine" which included a cattle plague, followed shortly by the Black Death.
Answer: 14th Century (

1707. Present-day country whose capital was built on the site of Tenochtitlan.
Answer: Mexico (or United

1708. Spanish conquistador who conquered their empire in the early 16th century.
Answer: Hernán Cortés (

1709. Emperor who was stoned after surrendering to the Spanish invaders.
Answer: Montezuma II (

1710. Language spoken in their royal court.
Answer: Nahuatl (

1711. Patron deity of Tenochtitlan to whom they sacrificed humans by removing their hearts.
Answer: Huītzilōpōchtli [[HWEET-zee-loh-"POACH"-tlee]]

1712. Technique for growing crops in shallow lake beds on small rectangular areas.
Answer: Chinampa

1713. This man is often credited with saving one country's Jewish population by convincing Gustaf V of Sweden to open his borders to refugees. This man went by the pseudonym “Nicholas Baker” while working as a consultant on the Manhattan Project. This scientist, with Ernest (+) Rutherford, gives his name to an atomic model that exhibits electrons of a hydrogen atom moving in a (*) “planetary” motion. For ten points, what Danish scientist won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922 for proposing that electrons orbit the nucleus in energy levels?
Answer: Niels Bohr (or Niels Henrik David Bohr

1714. This sport is depicted in a Francisco de Goya sketch showing the historical "El Campeador" El Cid performing it on horseback. The treatise Death in the Afternoon by Ernest (+) Hemingway recounts the traditions surrounding this sport, particularly in Pamplona. Doctors developed a special type of surgery to deal with injuries given by (*) horns to practitioners of this sport. For ten points, name this bloody sport performed in Spanish-speaking nations by matadors.
Answer: Bullfighting (

1715. A historical fairy-tale opera in this language depicts one sister promising to bear a "bogatyr" knight for a certain monarch. That opera in this language partially takes place in the principality of Tmutarakan [[tuh-MOO-tah-RAH-kahn]]. The monologue "I have attained supreme power" (+) is sung by the title character of an opera in this language who gives the throne to his son. That play in this language takes place during the Time (*) of Troubles. For ten points, give this language of operas such as The Tale of Tsar Saltan and Boris Godunov.
Answer: Russian (or Russkiy)

1716. A propaganda tale during WWI claimed Sergeant Harry Band suffered this form of punishment at the hands of German soldiers. In Tokugawa Japan, Haritsuke was the practice of (+) thrusting spears into criminals during this form of punishment. Six thousand participants of the Third Servile War were punished in this manner along the Appian Way. The most famous symbol of (*) Christianity was used for, for ten points, which form of capital punishment traditionally suffered by Jesus?
Answer: Crucifixion (or Crucifying

1717. This country resettled Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany in the town of Sosúa [[soh-SOO-ah]] after the Évian Conference. During one massacre in this country, the fate of the victims was determined by how they pronounced the term "perejil'' [[peh- reh-HEEL]] (+) when soldiers held up a certain herb. One leader of this country had several thousands migrants from a neighboring country killed in the Parsley Massacre and was nicknamed "El (*) Jefe" [[HE-feh]]. For ten points, name this Caribbean country that was ruled for over thirty years by Rafael Trujillo [[troo-HEE-yoh]] from Santo Domingo.
Answer: Dominican Republic (or República Dominicana

1718. A man in this profession, Dua-Kheti, may have written the work The Satires of the Trades which extolled the virtues of this occupation. A female recluse named Diemut who held this occupation is considered a local saint in her home region of Austria for single-handedly stocking the Wessobrunn [[VEH-soh-broohn]] Monastery library (+). This type of public servant developed the demotic Egyptian script for everyday use (*). Papyrus scrolls were used by, for ten points, which type of professional copyist who became obsolete after the invention of the printing press?
Answer: Scribes (

1719. A ceramic mask from the Sesklo culture depicted these creatures as early as 6000 BCE. The oldest stone pediment in Greece displays an image of one of these creatures at the temple of Corfu. According to Hesiod’s Theogony, (+) Ceto and Phorcys were the parents of these creatures, which were often depicted beheaded (*) and placed onto shields, like the Aegis. Believed by the Ancient Greeks to have provided protective magic for homes, for ten points, what mythological serpent-headed monsters included Medusa?
Answer: Gorgons (or Gorgon sisters

1720. This organization built the largest wooden ship of the late 16th century, known as Der Grosse Adler for service during the Northern Seven Years' War. The Stalhof of London served as the principal kontor, (+) or foreign trading post, of this organization until Edward IV expelled a group of Cologne merchants. Maritime trade of the medieval Baltic (*) and North Seas was dominated by, for ten points, what trade league of German and Scandinavian guilds and towns?
Answer: Hanseatic League (

1721. In this empire, unfree persons known as siraku were tied to temple lands and acted as tenants for the local religion. The capture of the Medean Wall following the 539 BC Battle of Opis led to the collapse of this empire. The Chaldean (+) period of this empire began after the chieftain Nabopolassar took advantage of the weakness of the Neo-Assyrians to dominate (*) Mesopotamia. The likes of Nebuchadnezzar and Hammurabi led iterations of, for ten points, what empire centered on a namesake city in which the Hanging Gardens were built?
Answer: Babylonia (

1722. This man appointed Michigan senator Zachariah Chandler to Secretary of the Interior in order to fight corruption within the Bureau of Indian Affairs. This man’s Secretary of the Treasury, Benjamin Bristow, cracked down on a scandal during this president’s tenure that culminated in the indictment of John McDonald and this president’s private secretary, Orville Babcock. The Whiskey Ring scandal occurred during the presidency of, for ten points, what Civil War general who succeeded Andrew Johnson as president?
Answer: Ulysses S. Grant (or Hiram Ulysses Grant)

1723. In 1791, the HMS Pandora broke on this geographical feature, killing 35 sailors. Discovered in 1768 by French explorer Louis de Bougainville, this geographic feature was the site of a major shipwreck for the HMS Endeavour, captained by James Cook, which was only able to break away due to a high tide. In 2018, the National Geographic said half of this place was dead, “Akin to a forest after a devastating fire.” For thousands of years, Torres Islanders and Aboriginal peoples have been using, for ten points, what coral system off the coast of Queensland, Australia?
Answer: Great Barrier Reef

1724. A composer from this musical era, Heinrich Biber [[BEE-buh]], called for strings to play col legno to evoke the sounds of battle in the opening of Battalia. Another composer from this era, who wrote the music for The Bourgeois Gentleman, died by stabbing himself with a conducting staff. The all-female ensemble of the Ospedale Della Pieta orphanage often sang music by a composer from this era who wrote four concerti grossi depicting changing weather throughout the year. For ten points, name this classical music era of Jean- Baptiste Lully, Antonio Vivaldi, and Johann Sebastian Bach.
Answer: Baroque era

1725. Following the Bolshevik Revolution, an alternative version of this character was banned for being too “bourgeois,” with Joseph Stalin instead uplifting the Slavic "Ded Moroz." Jerry Rubin mocked the House Un-American Activities Committee by holding a toy rifle while dressed as this character. Thomas Nast depicted this character draped with the American flag and holding a puppet that resembled Jefferson Davis. For ten points, what character, based on a historical saint, is known for giving presents to children during Christmas?
Answer: Santa Claus (or Kris Kringle

1726. The merger of the Sveno and the Bolshevik Workers Party into the Fatherland Front overthrew this nation's monarchy following a Soviet invasion. This European nation lost the Second Balkan War against its former allies of Serbia and Greece, losing territory in Macedonia and Thrace. Tsars such as Ferdinand I and Boris III led, for ten points, what member of the Axis governed from the city of Sofia?
Answer: Tsardom of Bulgaria (or Tsarstvo Balgariya

1727. A man in this profession, Dua-Kheti, may have written the work The Satires of the Trades which extolled the virtues of this occupation. A female recluse named Diemut who held this occupation is considered a local saint in her home region of Austria for single- handedly stocking the Wessobrunn [[VEH-soh-broohn]] Monastery library. This type of public servant developed the demotic Egyptian script for everyday use. Papyrus scrolls were used by, for ten points, which type of professional copyist who became obsolete after the invention of the printing press?
Answer: Scribes (

1728. NASA’s future missions include launching the Dragonfly spacecraft to a feature of this celestial body to investigate its possible habitability. One of this planet’s moons was determined to be habitable after the Cassini space probe found evidence of geysers. An anagram that describes a feature of this planet as a “thin, flat ring” was published by Christian Huygens [[HOY-gehns]] in 1655. In 1610, Galileo Galilei observed the extensive ring system of, for ten points, what gas giant, the second largest planet in the solar system?
Answer: Saturn

1729. This ruler formally ended imperial funding for the Neoplatonic Academy, which had been revived by Emperor Theodosius the Younger. In the text The Buildings, Procopius falsely attributes the construction of walls in Edessa and Tomis to this patron of his rather than to this man's uncle and predecessor of a similar name. The unpopularity of taxes raised by this monarch and his advisor, John the Cappadocian, led to the Nika [[NEE-kah]] Riots. The Corpus Juris Civilis was compiled by, for ten points, what sixth century Byzantine emperor who married Theodora?
Answer: Justinian the Great (

1730. To denounce the atrocities committed in this present-day country's war of independence, Archer Blood wrote a namesake telegram to the U.S. State Department. George Harrison and Ravi Shankar organized a benefit concert at Madison Square Garden in support of refugees in this country, which in 2013 witnessed the death of over eleven hundred people in the world's deadliest garment factory disaster. For ten points, name this densely populated country in South Asia which broke away from Pakistan in 1971.
Answer: Bangladesh (or People's Republic of Bangladesh; or Gônoprojatontrī Bangladesh)

1731. During this war, future Stasi head Erich Mielke [[MEEL-kuh]] was a major participant in the killing of about 7000 priests during a "red terror." During this war, Emilio Mola Vidal may have coined the term "fifth column" to refer to hidden supporters within a target territory. The Abraham Lincoln Brigades were composed of American volunteers who fought for the Republican side in this war, during which the Falangists allowed the Nazi Condor Legion to bomb Guernica. For ten points, name this 1930s war which ended with Francisco Franco establishing a fascist regime.
Answer: Spanish Civil War (or Guerra Civil Española)

1732. A “Renaissance” among these people followed the overthrow of the Gutians [[GOO- tee-ans]]. The Stele [[STEE-lee]] of the Vultures commemorates the victory of Lagash [[LAY- gash]] over Umma, both cities founded by these people. Scenes of war and daily life are shown on the Standard of Ur, created by these people. These people were the first to build step-pyramid temples called ziggurats. For ten points, name this earliest civilization to spring up in Mesopotamia.
Answer: Sumerians BONUS: The Gutians initially overthrew the Akkadian Empire, which was founded by this conqueror. He is often considered the first "Emperor" in history. Sargon the Great (or Sargon of Akkad

1733. A man from this province, who successfully argued to be made an exemplar of clemency, expressed wonder at wealthy Romans coveting "poor huts." In this Roman province, Cartimandua [[kahr-tee-mahn-DOO-ah]] of the Brigantes [[bree-GAHN-tehs]] received and handed over the rebel leader Caratacus [[kah-rah-TAH-kooss]]. A generation later, Suetonius Paulinus put down a revolt in this region by defeating the Iceni [["eye"-SEE- nee]] at Watling Street. For ten points, name this Roman province where Boudica's [[BOO- dih-kahs]] revolt occurred and of which the northern boundary was marked by Hadrian's Wall.
Answer: Britannia (or Roman Britain; do not

1734. The constitution of this nation that was in place until 1987 was written by U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt. After this country's president ordered the mass execution of prisoners in 1915, he was killed by a mob, leading to a U.S. occupation. Toussaint L'Ouverture [[too-SAHN loh-vehr-TOOR]] is known as the father of this country for leading it to independence. For ten points, name this country whose President Jovenel Moïse [[jove-NEL moh-EEZ]] was assassinated in 2021.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (or Republique d'Haiti; or Repiblik d Ayiti) BONUS: This family led Haiti from

1735. This man put the Lord Chamberlain in charge of theatre censorship after passing the Licensing Act. This man was a member of a social organization that met at Trumpet’s Tavern known as the “Kit-Kat Club.” News of the failed Battle of Cartagena [[car-tah-HEH- nah]] de Indias, which was part of the War of Jenkins' Ear, catalyzed the political downfall of this man. For ten points, identify this politician who came to power following the collapse of the South Sea Bubble and who is generally considered to be the first British prime minister.
Answer: Robert Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford (

1736. A September 2021 report found that employees of this organization, which opened a 100 million dollar "hub" in Berlin, perpetrated sexual abuse in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during its 2018 to 2020 mission in that country. This organization's director- general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus [[ah-dah-NAHM geh-breh-YEH-sooss]] of Ethiopia, was accused of allowing China veto power over its report on the origins of the Covid-19 virus. For ten points, name this United Nations organ that oversees disease intervention and advocates for expanded medical care.
Answer: World Health Organization (

1737. This man starred in a series of commercials for Paul Masson [[mah-SOHN]] with the slogan "We will sell no wine before its time." This man was infamously angered while recording a commercial for Findus frozen peas. In one film, a character played by this man erroneously states at the Vienna Riesenrad [[REE-zen-rahd]] that the Swiss had "five hundred years of democracy and peace" and produced only the cuckoo clock. For ten points, name this actor who portrayed Harry Lime in The Third Man and wrote and starred in Citizen Kane.
Answer: Orson Welles (or George Orson Welles) BONUS: Orson Welles founded this repertory company in New York that produced multiple stage and radio theatre productions including the "War of the Worlds” broadcast. This company notably staged a fascist-themed production of Julius Caesar in

1738. This case's subject based his legal argument on precedents such as Winny v. Whitesides and Rachel v. Walker. The grocer Samuel Russell falsely testified that he hired the central person in this case. In this case, Chief Justice Taney [[TAW-nee]] stripped Congress of its power to ban slavery in the territories, nullifying the principle of "once free, always free." For ten points, name this 1857 Supreme Court case which ruled that Black people in the United States lacked citizenship rights.
Answer: Dred Scott v. John F.A. Sandford (

1739. A group described by this color faced a six-day siege conducted by a volunteer army raised by by Toqto’a. A leader of a group described by this color was a merchant who sold salt illegally before amassing a 10,000 man force and leading an attack on Taizhou; that man was Zhang Sicheng. A man who had, as a child, been sent to a Buddhist monastery near Haozhou joined that movement described by this color. That man, Zhou Yuanzhang, would later become the Hongwu Emperor. For ten points, a group described as wearing headgear of what color rebelled against the Yuan Dynasty?
Answer: red (

1740. Civil Rights leader he called "a chump" for supporting Black integration into white society.
Answer: Martin Luther King Jr. (

1741. Abrahamic faith to which he converted before changing his name to Malik El- Shabazz.
Answer: Islam (

1742. Boxer once known as Cassius Clay whom he assisted in converting from Christianity.
Answer: Muhammad Ali

1743. Black Supremacist and leader of the NOI who later claimed to have ordered his killing.
Answer: Louis Farrakhan (

1744. Author of the book Roots who co-wrote his autobiography.
Answer: Alex Haley (or Alexander Murray Palmer Haley)

1745. Covert FBI initiative which widened the rift between him and Elijah Muhammad.
Answer: COINTELPRO (or Counter Intelligence Program)

1746. Controversial five-word phrase he used to positively describe the JFK assassination.
Answer: "Chickens Coming Home to Roost"

1747. Midwest KKK splinter group which he believe killed his father.
Answer: Black Legion

1748. Type of peasant who was tied to the land they farmed under feudalism.
Answer: Serfs (

1749. Crop which, along with rye and barley, was used in bread-making.
Answer: Wheat (

1750. Castrated bulls used by farmers to plow agricultural fields.
Answer: Oxen (

1751. Legal term for land ownership, now commonly used for an indefinite academic appointment at a university.
Answer: Tenure (

1752. "System" used by farmers in which one-half of the land lay fallow and the other was planted.
Answer: Two-field System

1753. Century of the "Great Famine" which included a cattle plague, followed shortly by the Black Death.
Answer: 14th Century (

1754. Term of French origin which denotes the land held by a lord of the manor.
Answer: Demense [[duh-MAHNS]] (or Domain)

1755. Prussian term for German land-holding nobles, commonly considered a modern hold-out of feudalism.
Answer: Junkers [[YOON-kehr]]

1756. Present-day country whose capital was built on the site of Tenochtitlan.
Answer: Mexico (or United

1757. Spanish conquistador who conquered their empire in the early 16th century.
Answer: Hernán Cortés (

1758. Emperor who was stoned after surrendering to the Spanish invaders.
Answer: Montezuma II (

1759. Language spoken in their royal court.
Answer: Nahuatl (

1760. Patron deity of Tenochtitlan to whom they sacrificed humans by removing their hearts.
Answer: Huītzilōpōchtli [[HWEET-zee-loh-"POACH"-tlee]]

1761. Technique for growing crops in shallow lake beds on small rectangular areas.
Answer: Chinampa

1762. Rival western state which defeated an invasion by their emperor, Axayacatl [[ak- sah-yah-KAH-til]].
Answer: Tarascan Empire (

1763. Term for "city-state," typically a polity which paid tribute as a vassal in exchange for limited autonomy.
Answer: Altepetl (or Altepeme)

1764. This man is often credited with saving one country's Jewish population by convincing Gustaf V of Sweden to open his borders to refugees. This man went by the pseudonym “Nicholas Baker” while working as a consultant on the Manhattan Project. This scientist, with Ernest (+) Rutherford, gives his name to an atomic model that exhibits electrons of a hydrogen atom moving in a (*) “planetary” motion. For ten points, what Danish scientist won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922 for proposing that electrons orbit the nucleus in energy levels?
Answer: Niels Bohr (or Niels Henrik David Bohr

1765. This sport is depicted in a Francisco de Goya sketch showing the historical "El Campeador" El Cid performing it on horseback. The treatise Death in the Afternoon by Ernest (+) Hemingway recounts the traditions surrounding this sport, particularly in Pamplona. Doctors developed a special type of surgery to deal with injuries given by (*) horns to practitioners of this sport. For ten points, name this bloody sport performed in Spanish-speaking nations by matadors.
Answer: Bullfighting (

1766. A historical fairy-tale opera in this language depicts one sister promising to bear a "bogatyr" knight for a certain monarch. That opera in this language partially takes place in the principality of Tmutarakan [[tuh-MOO-tah-RAH-kahn]]. The monologue "I have attained supreme power" (+) is sung by the title character of an opera in this language who gives the throne to his son. That play in this language takes place during the Time (*) of Troubles. For ten points, give this language of operas such as The Tale of Tsar Saltan and Boris Godunov.
Answer: Russian (or Russkiy)

1767. This man attacked Mary I and stated that female monarchs went against biblical teachings in the pamphlet The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of Women. This man briefly preached to a group of Marian exiles in Frankfurt and claimed that (+) Charles V was "no less enemy to Christ than was Nero." In Stirling, this man gave the sermon at James VI's [[the Sixth's]] (*) coronation. For ten points, name this Scottish Calvinist theologian and founder of Presbyterianism.
Answer: John Knox

1768. This country resettled Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany in the town of Sosúa [[soh-SOO-ah]] after the Évian Conference. During one massacre in this country, the fate of the victims was determined by how they pronounced the term "perejil'' [[peh-reh-HEEL]] (+) when soldiers held up a certain herb. One leader of this country had several thousands migrants from a neighboring country killed in the Parsley Massacre and was nicknamed "El (*) Jefe" [[HE-feh]]. For ten points, name this Caribbean country that was ruled for over thirty years by Rafael Trujillo [[troo-HEE-yoh]] from Santo Domingo.
Answer: Dominican Republic (or República Dominicana

1769. The Defence No. I calls the “spirit” of these entities “an inseparable appendage of human nature." Another essay argues that rather than removing the causes of these entities, we should control their effects. The power of these entities is curbed by Republicanism (+) according to "Federalist X [["TEN"]]." George Washington called the “alternating domination” of these entities “a frightful despotism” in his (*) farewell address. For ten points, name these organizations that coordinate political candidates and have included the Federalists and Democrats.
Answer: Political Parties (

1770. A ceramic mask from the Sesklo culture depicted these creatures as early as 6000 BCE. The oldest stone pediment in Greece displays an image of one of these creatures at the temple of Corfu. According to Hesiod’s Theogony, (+) Ceto and Phorcys were the parents of these creatures, which were often depicted beheaded (*) and placed onto shields, like the Aegis. Believed by the Ancient Greeks to have provided protective magic for homes, for ten points, what mythological serpent-headed monsters included Medusa?
Answer: Gorgons (or Gorgon sisters

1771. This organization built the largest wooden ship of the late 16th century, known as Der Grosse Adler for service during the Northern Seven Years' War. The Stalhof of London served as the principal kontor, (+) or foreign trading post, of this organization until Edward IV expelled a group of Cologne merchants. Maritime trade of the medieval Baltic (*) and North Seas was dominated by, for ten points, what trade league of German and Scandinavian guilds and towns?
Answer: Hanseatic League (

1772. In this empire, unfree persons known as siraku were tied to temple lands and acted as tenants for the local religion. The capture of the Medean Wall following the 539 BC Battle of Opis led to the collapse of this empire. The Chaldean (+) period of this empire began after the chieftain Nabopolassar took advantage of the weakness of the Neo-Assyrians to dominate (*) Mesopotamia. The likes of Nebuchadnezzar and Hammurabi led iterations of, for ten points, what empire centered on a namesake city in which the Hanging Gardens were built?
Answer: Babylonia (

1773. The completion of this project was celebrated with the first ticker-tape parade held in New York City. Originally planned as a lighthouse on the Suez Canal, this project was built on an exclave called Bedloe's Island and rests on steel infrastructure designed by Gustave Eiffel. A broken chain lies at the feet of this sculpture, whose title figure holds a tablet in her left arm. Designed by Frederic Bartholdi, for ten points, what is this colossal sculpture of a crowned woman holding a torch in New York Harbor?
Answer: Statue of Liberty (

1774. During these conflicts, Louis, Prince of Condé [[kaw-DAY]], launched a failed coup during the Surprise of Meaux [[MOH]]. The controversial Edict of January motivated a force led by the Duke of Guise [[GEES]] to perpetrate the Vassy Massacre, beginning these wars. The patron of the failed Fort Caroline mission in Floride [[floh-REED]], Gaspard de Coligny [[koh-lihn-YEE]], was assassinated during these wars in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The persecuted Huguenot minority fought the crown forces during, for ten points, what general period of sixteenth-century wars ended by the Edict of Nantes?
Answer: French Wars of Religion (

1775. This devastating event was the subject of the treatise Loimologia [[loy-moh-LOH-gee- ah]] which was written by a physician who personally witnessed this event, Nathaniel Hodges. In an attempt to stop this event, the village of Eyam lost over 200 people after collectively participating in an early instance of quarantining for disease control. Due to this event, the royal capital moved to the cities of Salisbury and Oxford after the wealthy, led by King Charles II, fled London. For ten points, name this 17th century epidemic which ravaged England, a blight caused by Yersinia pestis.
Answer: The Great Plague (

1776. During the Bellingham Riots in Washington, over 100 people of this faith were placed into "protective custody" by the Asiatic Exclusion League. This faith names an "Empire" which formed when various misl [[MEE-suhl]] states united to take advantage of the rapidly deteriorating Mughal [[moo-GAHL]] Empire. Bodyguards of this faith assassinated Indira [[in-DIH-ruh]] Gandhi following violence in the Punjab during Operation Blue Star. Gobind Singh [[goh-BIHND "SING"]] and Guru Nanak led, for ten points, which minority faith of India?
Answer: Sikhism (or Sikhi

1777. In an early experimental version of this literary form, Lawrence Sterne used a page of black ink to illustrate sorrow. This form's "sentimental" genre is exemplified by Samuel Richardson's 1740 work, Pamela; or Virtue Rewarded. This form separated from the traditional romance during the early eighteenth century with the publication of Moll Flanders and Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe. For ten points, name this lengthy form of narrative writing, typified by Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
Answer: Novel (

1778. In this city, French GIGN commandos assisted in the liberation of a mosque in 1979 after a two-week siege. The Italian adventurer Ludovico di Varthema wrote one of the first Western accounts of travel in this city, whose metro system only operates for seven days per year. This city demolished its Ottoman Ajyad Fortress in 2002 to make way for the Towers of the House hotel complex, which has the largest clock face in the world. The Masjid al-Haram and the Kaaba are located in, for ten points, what holiest city of Islam?
Answer: Mecca (or Makkah al-Mukarramah)

1779. One of these buildings at Gharni built by King Tiridates [[tee-ree-DAH-tees]] of Armenia was converted into a summer residence by Arsacid Queen Khosrovidukht [[kohs- roh-VEE-dookt]]. To celebrate the victory at Chaeronea [[kay-roh-NEH-ah]], Athenian sculptor Leochares [[leh-oh-KAH-rehs]] was commissioned with building one of these structures known as Philippeion. The "Sacred Way" connected the city of Samos to one of these locales known as the Heraion. Artemis is the dedicatee of an "Ancient Wonder of the World" in Ephesus which is, for ten points, what type of religiously significant structure?
Answer: Greek Temples (

1780. In the film X-Men: Days of Future Past, this person becomes head of the anti-mutant movement after Mystique assassinates Bolivar Trask. In another film, this man presents Forrest Gump the U.S. table tennis tournament medal. In an episode of Futurama, this person presents a soldier with the Purple Heart for handing him the television remote while on the couch with his vice president, the “Headless Body of Spiro Agnew.” For ten points, name this 37th president of the United States who was involved in the Watergate Scandal.
Answer: Richard Nixon (or Richard Milhous Nixon)

1781. This man supposedly crossed a channel while wearing chain mail in a tale told by his rival, Unferth. A band of thanes who abandoned this king after encountering a dragon are later exiled by his successor, Wiglaf [[VEE-glahf]]. This man tears the arms off a descendant of Cain who terrorizes the Hall of Heorot [[HEH-oh-roht]] of King Hrothgar [[HROTH-gahr]]. For ten points, name this hero of the Geats [[GEETS]] who defeats the monster Grendel in a namesake epic poem.
Answer: Beowulf BONUS: Beowulf is written in what Middle Age language, virtually unreadable to contemporary speakers without study? Old English (

1782. This country's first free elections were held in 1960, but the Coup of May 16th deposed its Second Republic and reversed the reforms of the April Revolution. This country's Yushin Constitution was signed shortly before an Olympic ceremony in which a number of doves were burnt alive. That tragedy in this country occurred in 1988, nine years after Nobel Prize laureate Kim Dae-Jung was elected its president. A northern neighbor invaded, for ten points, what Asian nation, leading to a 1950s war?
Answer: South Korea (or Republic Of Korea; or Daehan Minguk; or Namhanguk; do not

1783. This man's scholarly father, James, wrote an anti-Hindu historiography chronicling English colonialism in The History of British India. With Henry Hunt, this man was the first member of Parliament to openly call for women's suffrage in England, and this man wrote The Subjection of Women after conversations with his wife, Harriet Taylor. The teachings of Jeremy Bentham inspired, for ten points, what philosopher and MP who wrote Utilitarianism?
Answer: John Stuart Mill BONUS: John Stuart Mill called for the eradication of poverty through what kind of tax, which was implemented in the U.S. through the 16th amendment? Income Tax

1784. One holder of this federal cabinet position was forced to resign from an earlier state position after serving as the second in a duel that led to Button Gwinnett’s death. That man, Joseph Habersham, succeeded a holder of this position who was a strong supporter of Britain during the War of 1812 and an organizer of the Hartford Convention. Timothy Pickering and Samuel Osgood held this position which, prior to independence, was held by Ben Franklin. For ten points, name this position that oversees the USPS.
Answer: United

1785. A major figure in this movement defined it in an essay titled "Answering the Question: What is [this movement]?" This movement's ideals were supposedly espoused by monarchs like Catherine the Great and were often spread through meetings at Masonic Lodges, coffeehouses, and salons. Preceded by Renaissance Humanism and the Scientific Revolution, for ten points, what intellectual movement of the 17th and 18th centuries was espoused by figures such as Immanuel Kant [[KAHNT]] and Voltaire?
Answer: Age of Enlightenment (

1786. In a 2017 song, this artist sampled Fox News anchors Eric Bolling, Kimberly Guilfoyle and Geraldo Rivera claiming his music does more damage to black youths than the institution of racism. In reference to General Sherman's Special Field Orders, this rapper says he needs "forty acres and mule" not a "forty ounce and a pit bull" on the song "For Sale (Interlude)." During the procession on the 20th anniversary of the Million Man March for racial equality, this artist's song "Alright" was used as an anthem. A Pulitzer Prize for Music was awarded to, for ten points, what Compton-born rapper of To Pimp a Butterfly?
Answer: Kendrick Lamar (

1787. One commander at this battle, Ariabignes [[ah-ree-ah-BIG-nees]], was allegedly speared to death by Socles and Ameinias [[ah-MEY-nee-ahss]]. A deceptive message lured one side to the site of this battle, in which the playwright of Prometheus Bound, Aeschylus [[EH-skih-luss]], participated. Prior to this battle, one side lost over one-third of its ships in a storm near Magnesia. Eurybiades [[yoo-rih-BYE-ah-dees]] assisted the winning commander at this 480 BCE battle fought in a set of namesake straits. For ten points, name this victory for Themistocles over the navy of Xerxes.
Answer: Battle of Salamis (

1788. A play by this author opens with a Catholic martyr quelling rioters from Lombardy on Evil May Day. Thomas Nashe may have co-written the Temple Garden scene with this author in a trilogy of plays in which nobles pluck red or white roses to support either the Duke of Somerset or Richard Plantagenet. This author of Sir Thomas More wrote a play whose protagonist describes himself as "determined to prove a villain" in a speech opening "Now is the winter of our discontent." For ten points, name this playwright of histories including Henry VI and Richard III.
Answer: William Shakespeare BONUS: Henry VI, Part One was possibly a collaboration between Shakespeare and this other playwright, whose own history-inspired plays include Edward the Second and Tamburlaine. Christopher Marlowe Third Quarter The categories are:

1789. President who put forth the program.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (

1790. System of universal retirement pensions established during it.
Answer: Social Security (

1791. U.S. state which names a "Valley Authority" that managed a series of hydroelectric dams.
Answer: Tennessee (

1792. Program for unmarried, unemployed young men which had them create public works of art and upkeep parks.
Answer: CCC (or Civilian Conservation Corps)

1793. Strategy used by the president to fill the judiciary branch with pro-New Deal judges.
Answer: Court-packing (

1794. Term for the early days of the New Deal which included the creation of a new bank holiday and passage of the Securities Act.
Answer: The First Hundred Days

1795. Conflict which he and his Parliamentarians won over the Royalists, facilitating his rise to power.
Answer: English Civil War(s)

1796. King who was finally defeated, deposed, and executed under his auspices in 1649.
Answer: Charles I of England

1797. Title he took while ruling the Commonwealth, essentially establishing himself as dictator.
Answer: Lord Protector

1798. 1645 battle, the site of the final decisive defeat of Royalist forces.
Answer: Battle of Naseby

1799. "Leftover" Parliament which preceded his rule and succeeded the Long Parliament.
Answer: Rump Parliament

1800. 1653 John Lambert-authored document which outlined how the Commonwealth was to be ruled.
Answer: Instrument of Government

1801. First president of the modern republic, who championed a secularist ideology?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (or Mustafa Kemal)

1802. Country whose ambassador, Andrei Karlov, was assassinated in Turkey in 2016?
Answer: Russian Federation (or Rossiya; or Rossiyskaya Federatsiya)

1803. Country which underwent forcible population exchanges with Turkey of over 1.5 million people in the 1920s?
Answer: Greece (or Hellenic Republic; or Ellinikí Dimokratía)

1804. English translation of the Turkish phrase "derin devlet" referring to unelected interests that wield true power?
Answer: Deep

1805. 1920 treaty formally resolving Ottoman and Turkish participation in World War One?
Answer: Treaty of Sèvres [[SEV-ruh]]

1806. Weapon-based metaphor for the main principles of Turkish republican ideology?
Answer: Six Arrows (or Altı Ok)

1807. This person asserted that aliens visiting the Earth would be comparable to Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the Americas. Five essays and five biographies of influential scientists were published by this thinker in a book titled On the Shoulders of Giants. (+) This scientist’s final theory proposed that the universe is a “hologram.” Giving his name to a type of radiation that is emitted by black (*) holes, for ten points, what British physicist’s works include A Brief History of Time and The Theory of Everything?
Answer: Stephen Hawking (or Stephen William Hawking

1808. A passage in this book is often considered the first piece of public advocacy for a progressive tax. This book was written primarily to forge a new theory to replace the ideas of Mercantilists and Physiocrats. (*) This book built upon its author's earlier Theory of Moral Sentiments by linking the concept of the "Invisible Hand" (*) to production. For ten points, name this magnum opus of Scottish moral philosopher Adam Smith, considered a foundational text of classical economics.
Answer: The Wealth of Nations (or An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations)

1809. While campaigning in Juiz [[HWEZ]] de Fora, this candidate was stabbed below his bulletproof vest by a man who claimed to be "on a mission from God." A Facebook group called "Women Against" [this politician] sparked the (*) Ele Não [[EH-lay "NOW"]] demonstration against his policies. This successor to Michel Temer [[TEM- ehr]] led the movement to remove left-leaning president Dilma Rousseff [[ROO-sef]] while serving as federal deputy of (*) Rio de Janeiro. For ten points, name this man who in 2019 became the president of Brazil.
Answer: Jair Bolsonaro (or Jair Messias Bolsonaro)

1810. An organization named for this body of water gave up nearly all of its land holdings for 300,000 pounds via the Deed of Surrender. Members of that organization named for this body of water were massacred by Cuthbert Grant at the Battle of Seven (+) Oaks. This body of water's drainage basin, which was known as Rupert's Land, was awarded to a namesake company. This body of water takes its name from an explorer who captained the Half Moon. "Point blankets" were traded for furs (*) by an organization named for, for ten points, what large Canadian body of water?
Answer: Hudson Bay (

1811. After his death, this man supposedly caused the inhabitants of the Kentish city of Strood to be born with tails for siding with the crown. This religious figure temporarily fled to mainland Europe to the court of Louis VII [[the Seventh]] (+) following his dissent at the Constitutions of Clarendon. Henry II's possible utterance of the phrase "Will no one rid me of this turbulent priest?" was directed toward this man who was (*) slain by knights led by Hugh de Morville. A 12th century assassination targeted, for ten points, what canonized archbishop of Canterbury whose gravesite became a pilgrimage destination?
Answer: Thomas à Becket (

1812. Sebastian Sommer's hypothesis that buildings along this structure combined human barracks with horse stables was validated by excavations in the 2000s at South Shields. The Vallum (+) earthwork lay to the south of this structure, which added to pre-existing forts in a line from Solway Firth to the River Tyne. Picts and other Caledonian tribes lived north of this structure, which began construction in (*) 122 AD. For ten points, name this 73-mile barrier that formed the northern border of Roman Britain.
Answer: Hadrian's Wall (

1813. Members of this industry, such as Monier Gondy, were the victims of increased crime in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. The inspiration for the play Waiting for Lefty was a 1934 strike of workers in this industry, a strike that was faced by Mayor Fiorello (+) LaGuardia. A clothier from Chicago founded a private company in this industry called Checker. Medallion prices (*) have decreased in this industry as a result of shared economy companies like Lyft and Uber. For ten points, name this industry, traditionally dominated by yellow automobiles.
Answer: Taxi industry (

1814. A holder of the position who resided at Quispiguanca [[kwees-pee-GWAHN- kah]] employed ethnic groups including the Cachis as yanakunas. A holder of this position who built the Sacsayhuaman [[sahk-say-HWAH-mahn]] legendarily turned stones into warriors to defend his city from the rival Chanka people. After Vincente de Valverde gave the last holder of this position (+) a Bible, he threw it back in his face. That holder of this position ordered a room to be filled with gold after being captured at the Battle of Cajamarca (*) [[kah-hah-MAHR-kah]]. For ten points, name this royal position whose last holder was Atahualpa [[ah-tah-HWAHL-pah]].
Answer: Incan Emperor (or Sapa Inca

1815. This country's president, William Tolbert, was killed in a 1980 coup, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf was the first woman elected president of this nation. In 2018, this nation elected its most accomplished soccer (+) player of all time, George Weah [[WEH- uh]], as president. This country and Ethiopia were the only two countries in Africa that were never colonized (*) by a European power. For ten points, name this African country founded in 1822 by the American Colonization Society.
Answer: Republic of Liberia BONUS: A governor with this last name called in the

1816. The completion of this project was celebrated with the first ticker-tape parade held in New York City. Originally planned as a lighthouse on the Suez Canal, this project was built on an exclave called Bedloe's Island and rests on steel infrastructure designed by Gustave Eiffel. A broken chain lies at the feet of this sculpture, whose title figure holds a tablet in her left arm. Designed by Frederic Bartholdi, for ten points, what is this colossal sculpture of a crowned woman holding a torch in New York Harbor?
Answer: Statue of Liberty (

1817. During these conflicts, Louis, Prince of Condé [[kaw-DAY]], launched a failed coup during the Surprise of Meaux [[MOH]]. The controversial Edict of January motivated a force led by the Duke of Guise [[GEES]] to perpetrate the Vassy Massacre, beginning these wars. The patron of the failed Fort Caroline mission in Floride [[floh-REED]], Gaspard de Coligny [[koh-lihn-YEE]], was assassinated during these wars in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The persecuted Huguenot minority fought the crown forces during, for ten points, what general period of sixteenth-century wars ended by the Edict of Nantes?
Answer: French Wars of Religion (

1818. This devastating event was the subject of the treatise Loimologia [[loy-moh-LOH- gee-ah]] which was written by a physician who personally witnessed this event, Nathaniel Hodges. In an attempt to stop this event, the village of Eyam lost over 200 people after collectively participating in an early instance of quarantining for disease control. Due to this event, the royal capital moved to the cities of Salisbury and Oxford after the wealthy, led by King Charles II, fled London. For ten points, name this 17th century epidemic which ravaged England, a blight caused by Yersinia pestis.
Answer: The Great Plague (

1819. A holder of the position who resided at Quispiguanca [[kwees-pee-GWAHN-kah]] employed ethnic groups including the Cachis as yanakunas. A holder of this position who built the Sacsayhuaman [[sahk-say-HWAH-mahn]] legendarily turned stones into warriors to defend his city from the rival Chanka people. After Vincente de Valverde gave the last holder of this position a Bible, he threw it back in his face. That holder of this position ordered a room to be filled with gold after being captured at the Battle of Cajamarca [[kah- hah-MAHR-kah]]. For ten points, name this royal position whose last holder was Atahualpa [[ah-tah-HWAHL-pah]].
Answer: Incan Emperor (or Sapa Inca

1820. In an early experimental version of this literary form, Lawrence Sterne used a page of black ink to illustrate sorrow. This form's "sentimental" genre is exemplified by Samuel Richardson's 1740 work, Pamela; or Virtue Rewarded. This form separated from the traditional romance during the early eighteenth century with the publication of Moll Flanders and Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe. For ten points, name this lengthy form of narrative writing, typified by Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
Answer: Novel (

1821. In this city, French GIGN commandos assisted in the liberation of a mosque in 1979 after a two-week siege. The Italian adventurer Ludovico di Varthema wrote one of the first Western accounts of travel in this city, whose metro system only operates for seven days per year. This city demolished its Ottoman Ajyad Fortress in 2002 to make way for the Towers of the House hotel complex, which has the largest clock face in the world. The Masjid al-Haram and the Kaaba are located in, for ten points, what holiest city of Islam?
Answer: Mecca (or Makkah al-Mukarramah)

1822. One of these buildings at Gharni built by King Tiridates [[tee-ree-DAH-tees]] of Armenia was converted into a summer residence by Arsacid Queen Khosrovidukht [[kohs- roh-VEE-dookt]]. To celebrate the victory at Chaeronea [[kay-roh-NEH-ah]], Athenian sculptor Leochares [[leh-oh-KAH-rehs]] was commissioned with building one of these structures known as Philippeion. The "Sacred Way" connected the city of Samos to one of these locales known as the Heraion. Artemis is the dedicatee of an "Ancient Wonder of the World" in Ephesus which is, for ten points, what type of religiously significant structure?
Answer: Greek Temples (

1823. In the film X-Men: Days of Future Past, this person becomes head of the anti-mutant movement after Mystique assassinates Bolivar Trask. In another film, this man presents Forrest Gump the U.S. table tennis tournament medal. In an episode of Futurama, this person presents a soldier with the Purple Heart for handing him the television remote while on the couch with his vice president, the “Headless Body of Spiro Agnew.” For ten points, name this 37th president of the United States who was involved in the Watergate Scandal.
Answer: Richard Nixon (or Richard Milhous Nixon)

1824. During the Bellingham Riots in Washington, over 100 people of this faith were placed into "protective custody" by the Asiatic Exclusion League. This faith names an "Empire" which formed when various misl [[MEE-suhl]] states united to take advantage of the rapidly deteriorating Mughal [[moo-GAHL]] Empire. Bodyguards of this faith assassinated Indira [[in-DIH-ruh]] Gandhi following violence in the Punjab during Operation Blue Star. Gobind Singh [[goh-BIHND "SING"]] and Guru Nanak led, for ten points, which minority faith of India?
Answer: Sikhism (or Sikhi

1825. In 1962, a player of this instrument and his orchestra toured the Soviet Union as part of a cultural exchange program after the Cuban Missile Crisis. A player of this instrument, who led concerts at Guadalcanal while in the Navy, popularized Cole Porter’s "Begin the Beguine" [[beh-GEEN]] and added Billie Holiday to his band in 1938. Another player of this instrument led his band in a rendition of Louis Prima's "Sing Sing Sing" at a monumental 1938 concert at Carnegie Hall. For ten points, name this woodwind instrument played by Artie Shaw and Benny Goodman.
Answer: Clarinet

1826. This man supposedly crossed a channel while wearing chain mail in a tale told by his rival, Unferth. A band of thanes who abandoned this king after encountering a dragon are later exiled by his successor, Wiglaf [[VEE-glahf]]. This man tears the arms off a descendant of Cain who terrorizes the Hall of Heorot [[HEH-oh-roht]] of King Hrothgar [[HROTH-gahr]]. For ten points, name this hero of the Geats [[GEETS]] who defeats the monster Grendel in a namesake epic poem.
Answer: Beowulf BONUS: Beowulf is written in what Middle Age language, virtually unreadable to contemporary speakers without study? Old English (

1827. This country's first free elections were held in 1960, but the Coup of May 16th deposed its Second Republic and reversed the reforms of the April Revolution. This country's Yushin Constitution was signed shortly before an Olympic ceremony in which a number of doves were burnt alive. That tragedy in this country occurred in 1988, nine years after Nobel Prize laureate Kim Dae-Jung was elected its president. A northern neighbor invaded, for ten points, what Asian nation, leading to a 1950s war?
Answer: South Korea (or Republic Of Korea; or Daehan Minguk; or Namhanguk; do not

1828. This man's scholarly father, James, wrote an anti-Hindu historiography chronicling English colonialism in The History of British India. With Henry Hunt, this man was the first member of Parliament to openly call for women's suffrage in England, and this man wrote The Subjection of Women after conversations with his wife, Harriet Taylor. The teachings of Jeremy Bentham inspired, for ten points, what philosopher and MP who wrote Utilitarianism?
Answer: John Stuart Mill BONUS: John Stuart Mill called for the eradication of poverty through what kind of tax, which was implemented in the U.S. through the 16th amendment? Income Tax

1829. One holder of this federal cabinet position was forced to resign from an earlier state position after serving as the second in a duel that led to Button Gwinnett’s death. That man, Joseph Habersham, succeeded a holder of this position who was a strong supporter of Britain during the War of 1812 and an organizer of the Hartford Convention. Timothy Pickering and Samuel Osgood held this position which, prior to independence, was held by Ben Franklin. For ten points, name this position that oversees the USPS.
Answer: United

1830. A major figure in this movement defined it in an essay titled "Answering the Question: What is [this movement]?" This movement's ideals were supposedly espoused by monarchs like Catherine the Great and were often spread through meetings at Masonic Lodges, coffeehouses, and salons. Preceded by Renaissance Humanism and the Scientific Revolution, for ten points, what intellectual movement of the 17th and 18th centuries was espoused by figures such as Immanuel Kant [[KAHNT]] and Voltaire?
Answer: Age of Enlightenment (

1831. In a 2017 song, this artist sampled Fox News anchors Eric Bolling, Kimberly Guilfoyle and Geraldo Rivera claiming his music does more damage to black youths than the institution of racism. In reference to General Sherman's Special Field Orders, this rapper says he needs "forty acres and mule" not a "forty ounce and a pit bull" on the song "For Sale (Interlude)." During the procession on the 20th anniversary of the Million Man March for racial equality, this artist's song "Alright" was used as an anthem. A Pulitzer Prize for Music was awarded to, for ten points, what Compton-born rapper of To Pimp a Butterfly?
Answer: Kendrick Lamar (

1832. One commander at this battle, Ariabignes [[ah-ree-ah-BIG-nees]], was allegedly speared to death by Socles and Ameinias [[ah-MEY-nee-ahss]]. A deceptive message lured one side to the site of this battle, in which the playwright of Prometheus Bound, Aeschylus [[EH-skih-luss]], participated. Prior to this battle, one side lost over one-third of its ships in a storm near Magnesia. Eurybiades [[yoo-rih-BYE-ah-dees]] assisted the winning commander at this 480 BCE battle fought in a set of namesake straits. For ten points, name this victory for Themistocles over the navy of Xerxes.
Answer: Battle of Salamis (

1833. A play by this author opens with a Catholic martyr quelling rioters from Lombardy on Evil May Day. Thomas Nashe may have co-written the Temple Garden scene with this author in a trilogy of plays in which nobles pluck red or white roses to support either the Duke of Somerset or Richard Plantagenet. This author of Sir Thomas More wrote a play whose protagonist describes himself as "determined to prove a villain" in a speech opening "Now is the winter of our discontent." For ten points, name this playwright of histories including Henry VI and Richard III.
Answer: William Shakespeare BONUS: Henry VI, Part One was possibly a collaboration between Shakespeare and this other playwright, whose own history-inspired plays include Edward the Second and Tamburlaine. Christopher Marlowe Third Quarter The categories are:

1834. President who put forth the program.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (

1835. System of universal retirement pensions established during it.
Answer: Social Security (

1836. U.S. state which names a "Valley Authority" that managed a series of hydroelectric dams.
Answer: Tennessee (

1837. Program for unmarried, unemployed young men which had them create public works of art and upkeep parks.
Answer: CCC (or Civilian Conservation Corps)

1838. Strategy used by the president to fill the judiciary branch with pro-New Deal judges.
Answer: Court-packing (

1839. Term for the early days of the New Deal which included the creation of a new bank holiday and passage of the Securities Act.
Answer: The First Hundred Days

1840. Initially pejorative term used to refer to agencies which used various acronyms like the FCC and NRA.
Answer: Alphabet Agencies (

1841. Act passed which abandoned the harmful policy of Native American assimilation.
Answer: Indian Reorganization Act

1842. Conflict which he and his Parliamentarians won over the Royalists, facilitating his rise to power.
Answer: English Civil War(s)

1843. King who was finally defeated, deposed, and executed under his auspices in 1649.
Answer: Charles I of England

1844. Title he took while ruling the Commonwealth, essentially establishing himself as dictator.
Answer: Lord Protector

1845. 1645 battle, the site of the final decisive defeat of Royalist forces.
Answer: Battle of Naseby

1846. "Leftover" Parliament which preceded his rule and succeeded the Long Parliament.
Answer: Rump Parliament

1847. Irish city that his forces brutally sacked following a 1649 siege.
Answer: Drogheda [[DRAW-huh-duh]] (

1848. 1653 John Lambert-authored document which outlined how the Commonwealth was to be ruled.
Answer: Instrument of Government

1849. Term for the effort to seize much of the Spanish Caribbean, leading to the capture of Jamaica.
Answer: The Western Design

1850. First president of the modern republic, who championed a secularist ideology?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (or Mustafa Kemal)

1851. Country whose ambassador, Andrei Karlov, was assassinated in Turkey in 2016?
Answer: Russian Federation (or Rossiya; or Rossiyskaya Federatsiya)

1852. Country which underwent forcible population exchanges with Turkey of over 1.5 million people in the 1920s?
Answer: Greece (or Hellenic Republic; or Ellinikí Dimokratía)

1853. English translation of the Turkish phrase "derin devlet" referring to unelected interests that wield true power?
Answer: Deep

1854. 1920 treaty formally resolving Ottoman and Turkish participation in World War One?
Answer: Treaty of Sèvres [[SEV-ruh]]

1855. Weapon-based metaphor for the main principles of Turkish republican ideology?
Answer: Six Arrows (or Altı Ok)

1856. Militant wing of the MHP party involved in the assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II?
Answer: Grey Wolves (or Bozkurtlar

1857. 1922 standoff over control of the Dardanelles that nearly caused a war with the UK?
Answer: Chanak Crisis (or Çanakkale Krizi)

1858. This person asserted that aliens visiting the Earth would be comparable to Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the Americas. Five essays and five biographies of influential scientists were published by this thinker in a book titled On the Shoulders of Giants. (+) This scientist’s final theory proposed that the universe is a “hologram.” Giving his name to a type of radiation that is emitted by black (*) holes, for ten points, what British physicist’s works include A Brief History of Time and The Theory of Everything?
Answer: Stephen Hawking (or Stephen William Hawking

1859. A passage in this book is often considered the first piece of public advocacy for a progressive tax. This book was written primarily to forge a new theory to replace the ideas of Mercantilists and Physiocrats. (*) This book built upon its author's earlier Theory of Moral Sentiments by linking the concept of the "Invisible Hand" (*) to production. For ten points, name this magnum opus of Scottish moral philosopher Adam Smith, considered a foundational text of classical economics.
Answer: The Wealth of Nations (or An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations)

1860. While campaigning in Juiz [[HWEZ]] de Fora, this candidate was stabbed below his bulletproof vest by a man who claimed to be "on a mission from God." A Facebook group called "Women Against" [this politician] sparked the (*) Ele Não [[EH-lay "NOW"]] demonstration against his policies. This successor to Michel Temer [[TEM-ehr]] led the movement to remove left-leaning president Dilma Rousseff [[ROO-sef]] while serving as federal deputy of (*) Rio de Janeiro. For ten points, name this man who in 2019 became the president of Brazil.
Answer: Jair Bolsonaro (or Jair Messias Bolsonaro)

1861. An organization named for this body of water gave up nearly all of its land holdings for 300,000 pounds via the Deed of Surrender. Members of that organization named for this body of water were massacred by Cuthbert Grant at the Battle of Seven (+) Oaks. This body of water's drainage basin, which was known as Rupert's Land, was awarded to a namesake company. This body of water takes its name from an explorer who captained the Half Moon. "Point blankets" were traded for furs (*) by an organization named for, for ten points, what large Canadian body of water?
Answer: Hudson Bay (

1862. After his death, this man supposedly caused the inhabitants of the Kentish city of Strood to be born with tails for siding with the crown. This religious figure temporarily fled to mainland Europe to the court of Louis VII [[the Seventh]] (+) following his dissent at the Constitutions of Clarendon. Henry II's possible utterance of the phrase "Will no one rid me of this turbulent priest?" was directed toward this man who was (*) slain by knights led by Hugh de Morville. A 12th century assassination targeted, for ten points, what canonized archbishop of Canterbury whose gravesite became a pilgrimage destination?
Answer: Thomas à Becket (

1863. Sebastian Sommer's hypothesis that buildings along this structure combined human barracks with horse stables was validated by excavations in the 2000s at South Shields. The Vallum (+) earthwork lay to the south of this structure, which added to pre-existing forts in a line from Solway Firth to the River Tyne. Picts and other Caledonian tribes lived north of this structure, which began construction in (*) 122 AD. For ten points, name this 73-mile barrier that formed the northern border of Roman Britain.
Answer: Hadrian's Wall (

1864. Members of this industry, such as Monier Gondy, were the victims of increased crime in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. The inspiration for the play Waiting for Lefty was a 1934 strike of workers in this industry, a strike that was faced by Mayor Fiorello (+) LaGuardia. A clothier from Chicago founded a private company in this industry called Checker. Medallion prices (*) have decreased in this industry as a result of shared economy companies like Lyft and Uber. For ten points, name this industry, traditionally dominated by yellow automobiles.
Answer: Taxi industry (

1865. Members of this group were selected to suppress the Coeur d'Alene [[koor dah-LEEN]] mining disputes of 1892 and 1899 to increase hostility. A man who served 28 years with this group, and named a giant sequoia after Booker T. Washington, was named Charles (+) Young. This group was discriminated against by white residents in the Brownsville affair. Due to his work with a branch of this group called the 10th Cavalry Regiment, John Pershing (*) earned the nickname "Black Jack." For ten points, give this unofficial nickname of African-American regiments that often fought against Native Americans.
Answer: Buffalo Soldiers (

1866. This country's president, William Tolbert, was killed in a 1980 coup, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf was the first woman elected president of this nation. In 2018, this nation elected its most accomplished soccer (+) player of all time, George Weah [[WEH-uh]], as president. This country and Ethiopia were the only two countries in Africa that were never colonized (*) by a European power. For ten points, name this African country founded in 1822 by the American Colonization Society.
Answer: Republic of Liberia BONUS: A governor with this last name called in the

1867. This man's consort may have sent Suppiluliuma I [[soo-pee-loo-LYOO-muh "the First"]] a letter while he besieged Carchemish in a possible effort to merge her royal house with that of the Hittite Empire. That queen, Ankhesenamun [[ahn-keh-sen-ah-MOON]], was one of the children of Akhenaten, as was this ruler, who may have died from complications of sickle cell anemia. Howard Carter discovered the tomb of, for ten points, what boy-king, found in the Valley of the Kings?
Answer: King Tut (or Tutankhamen)

1868. Following his return from exile, this monarch formally abandoned the institution of slavery in 1942 in an effort to finish the reforms of Yohannes IV. This man, who banned the Oromo language, was removed by the communist Derg regime. This negus [[NEH-gus]] failed to resist an Italian invasion in the 1930s, leading to his nation's occupation. The final emperor of Ethiopia was, for ten points, what monarch, sometimes known as Ras Tafari?
Answer: Haile Selassie I (

1869. In 2020, DNA paternity tests revealed that one holder of this position had fathered a child out of wedlock with Sybille de Selys Longchamps. The first holder of this position declined to take up the throne of Greece under the 1830 London Protocol. One man who took this title in 2013 resides at the Palace of Laeken [[LAY-kehn]] and claimed this title after the sudden abdication of his father, Albert II. For ten points, name this title, once held by a man who was known for atrocities committed in the Congo Free State, Leopold II.
Answer: King of Belgium (or King of the Belgians; or Koning der Belgen; or Roi des Belges; or König der Belgier

1870. One god who appeared as one of these animals, Orochi, was defeated by the hero Susano'o [[soo-SAH-nah OH]], who found the "Grass-Cutting Sword" in its tail. A traditional symbol of medicine, the Rod of Asclepius, depicts these creatures, which were allowed to freely crawl near patients in Ancient Greece. One legend claims conquistador Hernan Cortes was mistake for Quetzalcoatl, a "feathered" example of, for ten points, what type of reptile, which supposedly tempted Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden?
Answer: Snakes (

1871. A building named for this man had to sand down panels on the Founders Room to avoid concentrating sunlight on nearby residences. Acoustic designers Minoru Nagata and Yasuhisa Toyota created the interior of that building named for this man, whose exterior architecture was designed by Frank Gehry and which is the home of the Los Angeles Philharmonic. Another complex named after this man contains long-running sections such as Critter Country, Adventureland, and Main Street U.S.A. For ten points, identify this animator and namesake of "Land" and "World" theme park complexes in California and Florida.
Answer: Walt Disney (or Walter Elias Disney

1872. This territory is home to a namesake petrel, also known as the Cahow [[KAY-how]], which was thought to have been extinct for three hundred years until its rediscovery in 1951. While en route to Jamestown, George Somers’s shipwrecked fleet used smaller boats to colonize this island. During the English Civil War, this island's governor, William Sayle, moved its anti-royalist inhabitants to the Bahamas. For ten points, identify this overseas British dependency that names a “Triangle” known for odd disappearances.
Answer: Bermuda (

1873. The length of the case Swidler & Berlin v. United States, a case involving this man's administration, led to the demise of the independent counsel at the federal level. Kenneth Starr exonerated this man, but not his wife, in the so-called "Travelgate," which dealt with the sudden firing of seven employees in an act of cronyism. Linda Tripp leaked intimate phone calls between a White House intern and this man, leading to perjury charges and an impeachment trial. The Whitewater and Lewinsky scandals rocked the administration of, for ten points, what Democratic president?
Answer: Bill Clinton (or William Jefferson Clinton

1874. One psychologist used his experiences in one of these places to outline his theory of logotherapy. One philosopher controversially claimed that keeping a positive outlook was necessary for survival in these places in the book Man's Search for Meaning. One of the primary developers of these places was used as an example of the "banality of evil" in Hannah Arendt's book Eichmann in Jerusalem. Victor Frankl wrote about his time in, for ten points, what locations where the majority of killings during the Holocaust took place?
Answer: Nazi concentration camps (

1875. This agreement was first put forward by James Wilson to bridge support for the House of Representatives. Alexander Hamilton asked, "Would it be just to impose a singular burden, without conferring some adequate advantage?" in debating this agreement. This compromise proposed "adding to the whole Number of free Persons, including those bound to Service for a Term of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed." For ten points, name this 1787 compromise over the method by which enslaved persons would be counted in determining a state's population.
Answer: Three-Fifths Compromise BONUS: This abolitionist pointed to the Constitution as an anti-slavery document in a debate with George Thompson about the Three-Fifths Compromise. He later founded the newspaper The North Star. Frederick Douglass (

1876. Along this structure, a dispute over the repatriation of Magyar POWs led in part to the Revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion. Alexander Kolchak's government was weakened when parts of this structure between Chita and Krasnoyarsk [[krass-nuh-YARSK]] were destroyed by partisans. Until the completion of the Circum-Baikal Railway, a train ferry was used to connect two parts of this route. Major cities on this route include Yekaterinburg [[yeh-KAT- eh-rin-burg]] and Novosibirsk [[noh-voh-see-BEERSK]]. For ten points, name this longest railway in the world, stretching from Moscow to Vladivodstok.
Answer: Trans–Siberian Railway (or Transsibirskaya magistral; or TSR

1877. The Process Certification Scheme named for this city aimed to prevent a certain good from being sold to finance paramilitaries. Esau Damon was the first person to discover that good, a precious mineral, in Colesberg Kopje, located in this city. The Honoured Dead Memorial in this city commemorates soldiers who died during a Boer War-era siege of this city over its valuable mines. For ten points, name this South African city known worldwide for its diamonds.
Answer: Kimberley BONUS: What diamond company, financed by Alfred Beit and originally owned by Cecil Rhodes, profited from several Kimberley mines. De Beers Group

1878. The whipping of the young chief of these people led to the cannibalization of a European ship's crew, an incident known as the Boyd Massacre. Clans of these people are known as hapū, and after gaining firearms from Europeans, these people fought the Musket Wars. The poorly-translated Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] led to this people group signing away their land to British authorities. The indigenous people of New Zealand are, for ten points, what Polynesian culture?
Answer: Māori BONUS: This British captain and navigator was the first European to successfully communicate with the Māori and names the strait separating North and South island. James Cook (

1879. A movement to expand legal rights for these people was opposed by the "Brunswick clubs" and was largely financed by "forty-shillingers" in an association founded by Richard Shiel and Daniel O'Connell. An 1829 Relief Act benefiting these people was championed by the Duke of Wellington. The "emancipation" of these people removed the requirement to renounce transubstantiation before taking civil office. For ten points, name this group that was discriminated against in England with the slogan "No Popery."
Answer: Roman Catholics (

1880. This region was the site of the 1872 salvage hearings of the American merchant brigantine, Mary Celeste, after it was mysteriously discovered adrift off the Azores. The failed plan of Nazi Germany to capture this region during World War II was referred to as "Operation Felix." According to Article X [[TEN]] in the Peace of Utrecht, Spain ceded Minorca and this region to Great Britain. Located in the Iberian Peninsula, for ten points, what region on the southern tip of Spain has a namesake rock?
Answer: Gibraltar (

1881. During this event, William Hodson ordered the execution of three princes at the “Bloody Gate." Colin Campbell reinforced a garrison during this event, which allowed for an evacuation of women and children from Lucknow. Bahadur Shah II was exiled to Burma following this event, which was initiated by a controversy over animal fat used in rifle cartridges. For ten points, identify this 1857 "Mutiny" that resulted in the British Crown taking control of India from the British East India Company.
Answer: Sepoy Mutiny (or Sepoy Rebellion; or Indian Rebellion of

1882. Pennsylvania city whose fall to the British led to the Continental army fleeing to Valley Forge.
Answer: Philadelphia

1883. French marquis who assisted in the reorganization of the Continental army during the winter of 1777.
Answer: Marquis de Lafayette (or Gilbert du Motier; full name: Marie-Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de La Fayette

1884. Prussian drillmaster who taught tactics to American forces using his "Blue Book."
Answer: Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben (or Baron von Steuben; or Friedrich Wilhelm August Heinrich Ferdinand von Steuben)

1885. Form of disease resistance which predates vaccination, used at Valley Forge to prevent smallpox outbreaks.
Answer: Inoculation

1886. Victor at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse who oversaw supply management as Quartermaster General.
Answer: Nathanael Greene

1887. Politician and general who led "Free France" after the fall of the Third Republic.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle (or Charles André Joseph Marie de Gaulle)

1888. Emperor whose government collapsed following the Franco-Prussian War, leading to the formation of the Third Republic.
Answer: Napoleon III (

1889. 1890s trial of a French officer of Jewish origin which led to his false imprisonment.
Answer: Dreyfus Affair (or L'affaire Dreyfus

1890. Leftist movement which seized Paris in 1871 and was brutally put down by General Patrice de MacMahon.
Answer: Communards (

1891. Aggressive nationalism which became the nickname of Georges Ernest Boulanger.
Answer: Revanchism (

1892. Series of agreements between France and the UK which tied the two closer diplomatically.
Answer: Entente Cordiale (

1893. Founder who declared himself the first Emperor of China.
Answer: Qin Shi Huang (or Shihuangdi

1894. Material used to make an "Army" at the Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor.
Answer: Terracotta

1895. Concept used to legitimize the emperor's right to rule China.
Answer: Mandate of Heaven (or Tiānmìng

1896. Strict philosophical school of Shang Yang.
Answer: Legalism (or Fajia

1897. Chaotic period of Chinese history ended by the Qin reunification.
Answer: Warring

1898. Han historian who claimed they buried over 400 Confucian scholars alive in his Records of the Grand Historian.
Answer: Sima Qian

1899. Due most likely to the docking of the SS Talune, over 90 percent of this region's residents became infected with the Spanish Flu. A proposed colonial flag for this region featured three white palm trees on a red shield. This region's second civil war ended with the Tripartite Convention of 1899, (+) which divided administration of this region between Germany and the United States. (*) For ten points, name this region that contained the last colonial acquisition of the German Empire and the only U.S. territory south of the equator.
Answer: Samoa (or Independent

1900. This man accepted twenty thousand marks as part of an agreement with an English royal known as the Treaty of Le Goulet [[goo-LEH]]. This man decided to take an overland route through the Alps rather than a sea route from Marseille [[mahr- SAY]] before reconvening with another group in (+) Messina. Isabella of Hainault [[ay- NOH]] was married to this man, who defeated an army led by Otto IV at a battle fought in Flanders in 1214. This victor at Bouvines [[boo-VEEN]] (*) allied with Richard the Lionheart during the Third Crusade. For ten points, name this French king given the epithet “Augustus.”
Answer: Philip II of France (or Philip Augustus

1901. One U.S. author, whose parents fled this country, wrote The Pearl That Broke Its Shell before running for Maryland's 6th congressional district. An author born in this country wrote a "mother-daughter story" in which Mariam kills Rasheed with (+) a shovel to save the relationship of Laila and Tariq [[tah-REEK]]. A violent Communist coup in this country inspired a novel in which Assef sexually assaults the Hazara boy, Hassan. Khaled Hosseini (*) set The Kite Runner in, for ten points, what country, ruled by the Taliban?
Answer: Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (or Də Afġānistān Islāmī Imārat; or Imārat-i Islāmī-yi Afghānistān)

1902. The sacred fire in this non-Greek deity’s temple was extinguished by Theodosius I in 394 AD. In a festival celebrating this deity, a donkey was dressed in a garland of flowers as it was believed that the same animal saved the deity from the god Priapus [[pry-AY-pus]]. (+) Offerings to this deity often included a sacred bread called the "mola salsa." At this deity’s temple, mothers (*) arrived barefoot and left offerings in exchange for blessings. For ten points, name this Ancient Roman goddess of the hearth who was attended to by namesake "Virgin" priestesses.
Answer: Vesta (

1903. Up to sixty percent of this syndicate's membership is made up of a former untouchable group known as the Burakumin, or "hamlet people," according to journalist David E. Kaplan. Grave offenses by members in this organization result in Yubitsume [[yoo-bit-SOO-meh]], (+) or the ritual cutting off of one's own little finger. Citing their own ninkyo honor code, this general class of crime (*) organizations delivered supplies to those affected by the 2011 Tōhoku catastrophe. The Japanese word for "gangsters" is used to refer to, for ten points, what array of crime organizations in Japan?
Answer: Yakuza (

1904. Conrad Reed sparked one of these events in Cabarrus County in 1799. The folk song “Mursheen Durkin” recounts the story of a participant in one of these events. Many participants in one of these events traveled to it via the Siskiyou (+) Trail. One of these events was publicized in Samuel Brannon’s California Star newspaper and was kickstarted by a (*) discovery made by James W. Marshall. For ten points, identify these types of events, one of which famously occurred following an 1849 discovery at Sutter’s Mill.
Answer: Gold Rushes (

1905. In 2021, this island used commemorative coins to celebrate its 140th anniversary of giving some women the right to vote in 1881. This island was ceded by Magnus VI [[the Sixth]] of Norway to Alexander III of (+) Scotland under the Treaty of Perth in 1266. This island’s legislature, the Tynwald [[TIN-wahld]], claims to be the “oldest continuous parliament” in the world, celebrating its millennium in (*) 1979. Known in recent history for its tax-haven status and money-laundering controversies, for ten points, what is this island crown dependency located between Great Britain and Ireland?
Answer: Isle of Man (or Mannin; or Ellan Vannin)

1906. In a diary entry, this leader wrote of his adversary, “He has a soft-as-cotton outer layer but at the same time has sharp needles hiding inside,” before saying, “He will be crushed inside (+) my palm.” Over 3,000 critics were executed as a result of martial law imposed by this leader in an event known as the White (*) Terror. For ten points, what “Generalissimo” fled to Taiwan after losing to Mao Zedong in the Chinese Civil War?
Answer: Chiang Kai-shek (

1907. This country purged its military in the 2000s on the basis of the “Ergenekon” [[ar-geh-NEH-kon]] ultra-nationalist conspiracy. In 2019, this country launched Operation Peace Spring after the U.S. pulled its support from Kurdish (+) allies. This country has been accused of democratic backsliding and Islamism under the AKP, or Justice and Development Party (*), hurting their chances of joining the EU. For ten points, name this country led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[reh-CHEP ty-EEP EHR-duh-wahn]].
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti) BONUS: Which nation overthrew its dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, in the relatively bloodless People Power Revolution? Republic of the Philippines (or Republika ng Pilipinas)

1908. This man's consort may have sent Suppiluliuma I [[soo-pee-loo-LYOO-muh "the First"]] a letter while he besieged Carchemish in a possible effort to merge her royal house with that of the Hittite Empire. That queen, Ankhesenamun [[ahn-keh-sen-ah-MOON]], was one of the children of Akhenaten, as was this ruler, who may have died from complications of sickle cell anemia. Howard Carter discovered the tomb of, for ten points, what boy-king, found in the Valley of the Kings?
Answer: King Tut (or Tutankhamen)

1909. Following his return from exile, this monarch formally abandoned the institution of slavery in 1942 in an effort to finish the reforms of Yohannes IV. This man, who banned the Oromo language, was removed by the communist Derg regime. This negus [[NEH-gus]] failed to resist an Italian invasion in the 1930s, leading to his nation's occupation. The final emperor of Ethiopia was, for ten points, what monarch, sometimes known as Ras Tafari?
Answer: Haile Selassie I (

1910. In 2020, DNA paternity tests revealed that one holder of this position had fathered a child out of wedlock with Sybille de Selys Longchamps. The first holder of this position declined to take up the throne of Greece under the 1830 London Protocol. One man who took this title in 2013 resides at the Palace of Laeken [[LAY-kehn]] and claimed this title after the sudden abdication of his father, Albert II. For ten points, name this title, once held by a man who was known for atrocities committed in the Congo Free State, Leopold II.
Answer: King of Belgium (or King of the Belgians; or Koning der Belgen; or Roi des Belges; or König der Belgier

1911. Due most likely to the docking of the SS Talune, over 90 percent of this region's residents became infected with the Spanish Flu. A proposed colonial flag for this region featured three white palm trees on a red shield. This region's second civil war ended with the Tripartite Convention of 1899, which divided administration of this region between Germany and the United States. For ten points, name this region that contained the last colonial acquisition of the German Empire and the only U.S. territory south of the equator.
Answer: Samoa (or Independent

1912. A building named for this man had to sand down panels on the Founders Room to avoid concentrating sunlight on nearby residences. Acoustic designers Minoru Nagata and Yasuhisa Toyota created the interior of that building named for this man, whose exterior architecture was designed by Frank Gehry and which is the home of the Los Angeles Philharmonic. Another complex named after this man contains long-running sections such as Critter Country, Adventureland, and Main Street U.S.A. For ten points, identify this animator and namesake of "Land" and "World" theme park complexes in California and Florida.
Answer: Walt Disney (or Walter Elias Disney

1913. While en route to Jamestown, George Somers’s shipwrecked fleet used smaller boats to colonize this island. During the English Civil War, this island's governor, William Sayle, moved its anti-royalist inhabitants to the Bahamas. For ten points, identify this overseas British dependency that names a “Triangle” known for odd disappearances.
Answer: Bermuda (

1914. The length of the case Swidler & Berlin v. United States, a case involving this man's administration, led to the demise of the independent counsel at the federal level. Kenneth Starr exonerated this man, but not his wife, in the so-called "Travelgate," which dealt with the sudden firing of seven employees in an act of cronyism. Linda Tripp leaked intimate phone calls between a White House intern and this man, leading to perjury charges and an impeachment trial. The Whitewater and Lewinsky scandals rocked the administration of, for ten points, what Democratic president?
Answer: Bill Clinton (or William Jefferson Clinton

1915. One psychologist used his experiences in one of these places to outline his theory of logotherapy. One philosopher controversially claimed that keeping a positive outlook was necessary for survival in these places in the book Man's Search for Meaning. One of the primary developers of these places was used as an example of the "banality of evil" in Hannah Arendt's book Eichmann in Jerusalem. Victor Frankl wrote about his time in, for ten points, what locations where the majority of killings during the Holocaust took place?
Answer: Nazi concentration camps (

1916. One god who appeared as one of these animals, Orochi, was defeated by the hero Susano'o [[soo-SAH-nah OH]], who found the "Grass-Cutting Sword" in its tail. A traditional symbol of medicine, the Rod of Asclepius, depicts these creatures, which were allowed to freely crawl near patients in Ancient Greece. One legend claims conquistador Hernan Cortes was mistake for Quetzalcoatl, a "feathered" example of, for ten points, what type of reptile, which supposedly tempted Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden?
Answer: Snakes (

1917. This individual’s tweet about receiving the COVID-19 vaccine was branded by Ted Cruz as “government propaganda.” Nearly 50 years earlier, this character was seen receiving an injection in a public service campaign to get more children vaccinated against measles. NASA invited this character to join the Challenger flight to teach kids about space, and Mitt Romney said that he loves this character, despite wanting to cut taxpayer money from PBS. From 1969 to 2018, Caroll Spinney portrayed, for ten points, what Sesame Street character, an eight foot-tall avian?
Answer: Big Bird

1918. This agreement was first put forward by James Wilson to bridge support for the House of Representatives. Alexander Hamilton asked, "Would it be just to impose a singular burden, without conferring some adequate advantage?" in debating this agreement. This compromise proposed "adding to the whole Number of free Persons, including those bound to Service for a Term of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed." For ten points, name this 1787 compromise over the method by which enslaved persons would be counted in determining a state's population.
Answer: Three-Fifths Compromise BONUS: This abolitionist pointed to the Constitution as an anti-slavery document in a debate with George Thompson about the Three-Fifths Compromise. He later founded the newspaper The North Star. Frederick Douglass (

1919. Along this structure, a dispute over the repatriation of Magyar POWs led in part to the Revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion. Alexander Kolchak's government was weakened when parts of this structure between Chita and Krasnoyarsk [[krass-nuh-YARSK]] were destroyed by partisans. Until the completion of the Circum-Baikal Railway, a train ferry was used to connect two parts of this route. Major cities on this route include Yekaterinburg [[yeh-KAT-eh-rin-burg]] and Novosibirsk [[noh-voh-see-BEERSK]]. For ten points, name this longest railway in the world, stretching from Moscow to Vladivodstok.
Answer: Trans–Siberian Railway (or Transsibirskaya magistral; or TSR

1920. The Process Certification Scheme named for this city aimed to prevent a certain good from being sold to finance paramilitaries. Esau Damon was the first person to discover that good, a precious mineral, in Colesberg Kopje, located in this city. The Honoured Dead Memorial in this city commemorates soldiers who died during a Boer War-era siege of this city over its valuable mines. For ten points, name this South African city known worldwide for its diamonds.
Answer: Kimberley BONUS: What diamond company, financed by Alfred Beit and originally owned by Cecil Rhodes, profited from several Kimberley mines. De Beers Group

1921. The whipping of the young chief of these people led to the cannibalization of a European ship's crew, an incident known as the Boyd Massacre. Clans of these people are known as hapū, and after gaining firearms from Europeans, these people fought the Musket Wars. The poorly-translated Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] led to this people group signing away their land to British authorities. The indigenous people of New Zealand are, for ten points, what Polynesian culture?
Answer: Māori BONUS: This British captain and navigator was the first European to successfully communicate with the Māori and names the strait separating North and South island. James Cook (

1922. A movement to expand legal rights for these people was opposed by the "Brunswick clubs" and was largely financed by "forty-shillingers" in an association founded by Richard Shiel and Daniel O'Connell. An 1829 Relief Act benefiting these people was championed by the Duke of Wellington. The "emancipation" of these people removed the requirement to renounce transubstantiation before taking civil office. For ten points, name this group that was discriminated against in England with the slogan "No Popery."
Answer: Roman Catholics (

1923. This region was the site of the 1872 salvage hearings of the American merchant brigantine, Mary Celeste, after it was mysteriously discovered adrift off the Azores. The failed plan of Nazi Germany to capture this region during World War II was referred to as "Operation Felix." According to Article X [[TEN]] in the Peace of Utrecht, Spain ceded Minorca and this region to Great Britain. Located in the Iberian Peninsula, for ten points, what region on the southern tip of Spain has a namesake rock?
Answer: Gibraltar (

1924. During this event, William Hodson ordered the execution of three princes at the “Bloody Gate." Colin Campbell reinforced a garrison during this event, which allowed for an evacuation of women and children from Lucknow. Bahadur Shah II was exiled to Burma following this event, which was initiated by a controversy over animal fat used in rifle cartridges. For ten points, identify this 1857 "Mutiny" that resulted in the British Crown taking control of India from the British East India Company.
Answer: Sepoy Mutiny (or Sepoy Rebellion; or Indian Rebellion of

1925. Pennsylvania city whose fall to the British led to the Continental army fleeing to Valley Forge.
Answer: Philadelphia

1926. French marquis who assisted in the reorganization of the Continental army during the winter of 1777.
Answer: Marquis de Lafayette (or Gilbert du Motier; full name: Marie-Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de La Fayette

1927. Prussian drillmaster who taught tactics to American forces using his "Blue Book."
Answer: Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben (or Baron von Steuben; or Friedrich Wilhelm August Heinrich Ferdinand von Steuben)

1928. Form of disease resistance which predates vaccination, used at Valley Forge to prevent smallpox outbreaks.
Answer: Inoculation

1929. Victor at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse who oversaw supply management as Quartermaster General.
Answer: Nathanael Greene

1930. Pennsylvania battle fought during the evacuation in a failed attempt to eradicate the Continental Army.
Answer: Battle of White Marsh

1931. Connecticut soldier who wrote a "narrative" covering the common soldier's experience.
Answer: Joseph Plumb Martin

1932. Politician and general who led "Free France" after the fall of the Third Republic.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle (or Charles André Joseph Marie de Gaulle)

1933. Emperor whose government collapsed following the Franco-Prussian War, leading to the formation of the Third Republic.
Answer: Napoleon III (

1934. 1890s trial of a French officer of Jewish origin which led to his false imprisonment.
Answer: Dreyfus Affair (or L'affaire Dreyfus

1935. Leftist movement which seized Paris in 1871 and was brutally put down by General Patrice de MacMahon.
Answer: Communards (

1936. Aggressive nationalism which became the nickname of Georges Ernest Boulanger.
Answer: Revanchism (

1937. Series of agreements between France and the UK which tied the two closer diplomatically.
Answer: Entente Cordiale (

1938. French Socialist prime minister immediately before and after World War Two.
Answer: Léon Blum (or André Léon Blum)

1939. 1904 affair in which it was exposed that General Louis André was hampering the careers of Catholic and royalist officers.
Answer: Affair of the Casseroles (

1940. Founder who declared himself the first Emperor of China.
Answer: Qin Shi Huang (or Shihuangdi

1941. Material used to make an "Army" at the Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor.
Answer: Terracotta

1942. Concept used to legitimize the emperor's right to rule China.
Answer: Mandate of Heaven (or Tiānmìng

1943. Strict philosophical school of Shang Yang.
Answer: Legalism (or Fajia

1944. Chaotic period of Chinese history ended by the Qin reunification.
Answer: Warring

1945. Han historian who claimed they buried over 400 Confucian scholars alive in his Records of the Grand Historian.
Answer: Sima Qian

1946. Nomadic confederacy of the steppes which Meng Tian partially conquered.
Answer: Xiongnu Confederation (

1947. Second emperor and brother of the heir who was forced to commit suicide following a coup by Zhao Gao.
Answer: Qin Er Shi (or Ying Huhai)

1948. This leader lost one election due to the Otsego sheriff’s office being vacant. As governor of New York, this man rejected a gerrymandering proposal from Alexander Hamilton. This leader argued for undivided government in Federalist Paper Number (+) 2. On the Supreme Court, this leader established the “cases and controversies” precedent, in contrast to the more activist philosophy of John Marshall. A 1795 (*) treaty between the U.S. and the UK is named for, for ten points, what first Supreme Court Chief Justice?
Answer: John Jay (

1949. This man accepted twenty thousand marks as part of an agreement with an English royal known as the Treaty of Le Goulet [[goo-LEH]]. This man decided to take an overland route through the Alps rather than a sea route from Marseille [[mahr- SAY]] before reconvening with another group in (+) Messina. Isabella of Hainault [[ay-NOH]] was married to this man, who defeated an army led by Otto IV at a battle fought in Flanders in 1214. This victor at Bouvines [[boo-VEEN]] (*) allied with Richard the Lionheart during the Third Crusade. For ten points, name this French king given the epithet “Augustus.”
Answer: Philip II of France (or Philip Augustus

1950. One U.S. author, whose parents fled this country, wrote The Pearl That Broke Its Shell before running for Maryland's 6th congressional district. An author born in this country wrote a "mother-daughter story" in which Mariam kills Rasheed with (+) a shovel to save the relationship of Laila and Tariq [[tah-REEK]]. A violent Communist coup in this country inspired a novel in which Assef sexually assaults the Hazara boy, Hassan. Khaled Hosseini (*) set The Kite Runner in, for ten points, what country, ruled by the Taliban?
Answer: Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (or Də Afġānistān Islāmī Imārat; or Imārat-i Islāmī-yi Afghānistān)

1951. The sacred fire in this non-Greek deity’s temple was extinguished by Theodosius I in 394 AD. In a festival celebrating this deity, a donkey was dressed in a garland of flowers as it was believed that the same animal saved the deity from the god Priapus [[pry-AY-pus]]. (+) Offerings to this deity often included a sacred bread called the "mola salsa." At this deity’s temple, mothers (*) arrived barefoot and left offerings in exchange for blessings. For ten points, name this Ancient Roman goddess of the hearth who was attended to by namesake "Virgin" priestesses.
Answer: Vesta (

1952. Up to sixty percent of this syndicate's membership is made up of a former untouchable group known as the Burakumin, or "hamlet people," according to journalist David E. Kaplan. Grave offenses by members in this organization result in Yubitsume [[yoo-bit-SOO-meh]], (+) or the ritual cutting off of one's own little finger. Citing their own ninkyo honor code, this general class of crime (*) organizations delivered supplies to those affected by the 2011 Tōhoku catastrophe. The Japanese word for "gangsters" is used to refer to, for ten points, what array of crime organizations in Japan?
Answer: Yakuza (

1953. Conrad Reed sparked one of these events in Cabarrus County in 1799. The folk song “Mursheen Durkin” recounts the story of a participant in one of these events. Many participants in one of these events traveled to it via the Siskiyou (+) Trail. One of these events was publicized in Samuel Brannon’s California Star newspaper and was kickstarted by a (*) discovery made by James W. Marshall. For ten points, identify these types of events, one of which famously occurred following an 1849 discovery at Sutter’s Mill.
Answer: Gold Rushes (

1954. In 2021, this island used commemorative coins to celebrate its 140th anniversary of giving some women the right to vote in 1881. This island was ceded by Magnus VI [[the Sixth]] of Norway to Alexander III of (+) Scotland under the Treaty of Perth in 1266. This island’s legislature, the Tynwald [[TIN-wahld]], claims to be the “oldest continuous parliament” in the world, celebrating its millennium in (*) 1979. Known in recent history for its tax-haven status and money-laundering controversies, for ten points, what is this island crown dependency located between Great Britain and Ireland?
Answer: Isle of Man (or Mannin; or Ellan Vannin)

1955. This historian asked "Why were patricians not permitted to live on the Capitoline?" as the ninety-first in a series of Questions in one of his works. A set of “Sayings of Spartans” was collected by this one-time priest at the Temple of (+) Delphi in a work which also contains an often-cited account of Egyptian burial rites, the Moralia [[moh-RAH-lyah]]. This author is best known for a work containing 48 biographies which are grouped into (*) pairs featuring one Greek and one Roman. For ten points, name this Roman historian who wrote Parallel Lives.
Answer: Plutarch (or Ploutarchos

1956. This country purged its military in the 2000s on the basis of the “Ergenekon” [[ar-geh-NEH-kon]] ultra-nationalist conspiracy. In 2019, this country launched Operation Peace Spring after the U.S. pulled its support from Kurdish (+) allies. This country has been accused of democratic backsliding and Islamism under the AKP, or Justice and Development Party (*), hurting their chances of joining the EU. For ten points, name this country led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[reh-CHEP ty-EEP EHR-duh-wahn]].
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti) BONUS: Which nation overthrew its dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, in the relatively bloodless People Power Revolution? Republic of the Philippines (or Republika ng Pilipinas)

1957. The name for this object was suggested by an eleven-year old, and other suggested names for it were Zeus and Percival. When this heavenly body was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, it disproved Percival Lowell's Planet X theory. Neil deGrasse Tyson said that allowing this object to be a planet would be an "insult" to the other planets. For ten points, name this trans-Neptunian dwarf planet in the Kuiper [[KY-per]] Belt that was once called the "Ninth Planet".
Answer: Pluto

1958. This man created a "Spirit Thermometer" filled with liquor to be displayed in the court of his patron, Ferdinando II de Medici. Pope Urban VIII's [[the eighth's]] inquisitors led an investigation against this man after he published “Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems.” A legend tells how this man dropped two balls of different masses off the Leaning Tower to test an Aristotelian hypothesis. Four moons of Jupiter are named for, for ten points, which Italian physicist and astronomer?
Answer: Galileo Galilei (or Galileo di Vincenzo Bonaiuti de' Galilei

1959. Description Acceptable. A dispute over who accomplished this feat led to the Smithsonian wrongly attributing it to engineer Samuel Langley. This feat, which lasted 59 seconds, was launched from an incline on Kill Devil Hill. Bicycle store employee Charlie Taylor built a lightweight gasoline motor to make this feat possible for the vessel Flyer I. Kitty Hawk, North Carolina was the sight of, for ten points, what feat accomplished by the Wright Brothers?
Answer: The First manned, powered Flight by the Wright Brothers (

1960. This man siphoned money to his family through a tax by which the ultra-wealthy were forced to donate to the Dana Sejahtera [[seh-jah-TEH-rah]] Mandiri fund. This man's ally, Ali Murtopo, incited riots to coincide with a visit by Japanese prime minister Kakuei Tanaka to discredit his rival Sumitro. The "Supersemar" Edict gave this general the right to restore order following a mid-1960s "Communist Purge" at the behest of his superior, Sukarno. The 1998 Riots in Jakarta led to the downfall of, for ten points, which dictator's "New Order" regime in Indonesia?
Answer: Suharto

1961. One hoax involving this event was the made-up shooting of Martin Šmíd [[SHMEED]] by police. Protesters during this event jingled keys to signify the unlocking of doors when Miloš Jakeš [[MEE-lohsh YAH-kehsh]] resigned as General Secretary. This event began on International Students' Day and ended when Gustáv Husák resigned and was replaced with the leader of the Charter 77 movement, Václav Havel. For ten points, name this revolution in 1989 that culminated with the ending of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia.
Answer: Velvet Revolution (or Gentle Revolution; or Sametová revoluce; or Nežná revolúcia)

1962. Nominoe became the first king of this region after he and his local Vannetais tribe supported Louis the Pious in the fight against his sibling Lothair. A duchess of this region name Anne of Monfort commissioned the tapestry Hunt of the Unicorn to commemorate her marriage to Louis XII [[the twelfth]]. This region, known as Breizh [[BREHSH]] in its native Celtic tongue, was ruled by Henry II son's Geoffrey from the city of Rennes [[REN]].The Edict of Nantes was signed in, for ten points, what region of Northwestern France?
Answer: Brittany (

1963. This man’s severed hands and head were displayed on the Rostra after his execution by Herennius and Popilius. When Clodius passed a law to deny him fire and water, this man went into exile in Thessalonica. Upon his return, this man attacked Mark Antony in several speeches, causing the Second Triumvirate to proscribe him as an enemy of the state. For ten points, name this optimate statesman, considered one of the finest orators in Roman history.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero

1964. In the Neolithic period on this island, a group of standing stones likely meant to evoke fertility were rearranged by the Torrean [[toh-REH-ahn]] people at the Filitosa [[fee-lee-TOH- sah]] site. This island, which the launching point of the pro-De Gaulle Operation Resurrection, was ruled for nearly five hundred years by a republic in Liguria. The site of the Maison Bonaparte, the birthplace of Napoleon, for ten points, what is this French island department?
Answer: Corsica (or Corse)

1965. The preaching background of this party's first leader led Morgan Phillips to comment, "Socialism in Britain owed more to Methodism than Marx." That founder of this party, Keir Hardie, resigned in favor of Arthur Henderson, who won the Nobel Peace Prize for chairing the Geneva Disarmament Conference. This party interrupted Winston Churchill's term as prime minister under the leadership of Clement Attlee. For ten points, name this currently center-left British political party, the opponent of the Conservatives.
Answer: Labour Party BONUS: Under the Attlee government, Labour minister Aneurin Bevan [[uh-NYE-rin BEH- vahn]] developed this government system that publicly funds hospitals and other social services throughout the United Kingdom.

1966. In response to an invasion along the Danube by this ruler, Mehmet II raised an army "second in size only" to the one that he used to conquer Constantinople. This ruler was captured by John Jiskra of Brandys under orders from Matthias Corvinus after this ruler disrespected the Ottomans by killing their messengers. This man’s brother, Mircea, was killed by the forces of John Hunyadi. The title of Voivode was held by this man, who ruled over Wallachia and was known for his use of stakes in dealing with enemies. For ten points, name this Romanian ruler who inspired a similarly named literary vampire.
Answer: Vlad the Impaler (or Vlad Tepes; or Vlad III

1967. Until 1997, this president's cabinet included a man nicknamed "Nothing Wrong Norman," who formerly headed the Commercial Farmers' Union and repeatedly denied racial divisions under this man's regime. This man's government imprisoned rival Canaan Banana on sodomy charges and launched the "drive out the trash" movement to destroy slums. In 2017, Emmerson Mnangagwa [[meh-nahn-GAH-gwah]] overthrew this president. Presiding in a time of hyperinflation in the 2000s, for ten points, who was this longtime dictator of Zimbabwe?
Answer: Robert Mugabe (or Robert Gabriel Mugabe) BONUS: Mugabe was a member of what ethnic group, whose ancestors built Great Zimbabwe in the Middle Ages? Shona (

1968. To cover up the nature of this event, Manucher Ghorbanifar suggested justifying it by freeing hostages held by Hezbollah. This event was investigated by the Tower Commission and led to the conviction of Oliver North. This event violated the Boland Amendment and was carried out in order to support an anti-communist Nicaraguan paramilitary group. For ten points, identify this scandal that involved the Reagan administration selling arms to Ayatollah Khomeini’s government.
Answer: Iran-Contra Affair (

1969. John Flaxman reconstructed a silver-gilted example of these objects that was on display at George IV’s coronation. Eleven copies of these objects were ordered by Numa Pompilius to divert thieves from stealing the one that fell from heaven. According to Virgil in the Aeneid, one of these objects depicts the death of Mettius Fufetius and the capture of the Sabine Women. The origin of that object of this type was given as a gift to Aeneas by Vulcan in his war against the Rutulians. For ten points, what type of object included the ancilia and the aegis, used as a tool of defense?
Answer: Shields (

1970. A portion of this piece's manuscript that contained the words "Quam olim da capo" was stolen at the 1958 Brussels World's Fair. A bass soloist sings the same melody of an arpeggiated B-flat major trombone solo in this piece's "Tuba Mirum." The wife of this piece's composer, Constanze [[kohn-STAHN-tse]], kept quiet about the role of Franz Xaver Süssmayr [[SOO-smy-uh]] in completing its "Lacrimosa" that was left mostly unfinished after its composer's 1791 death. For ten points, name this mass for the dead by the composer of The Magic Flute.
Answer: Mozart’s Requiem (

1971. In a 1992 book, Graham Hancock claims that this item was, for a time, held in Lake Tana. Known as the tabot in the Ge’ez language, this item is said to be housed in a building dedicated to “Our Lady Mary of Zion." Replicas of this item are contained in each Tewahedo Church. The Kebra Nagast notes that Menelik brought this item to Ethiopia while a counterfeit copy lies in Israel. A church in the Tigray region is said to hold this object, which contains a rod belonging to Aaron. For ten points, name this golden chest said to contain the original tablets of the Ten Commandments.
Answer: Ark of the Covenant (or Ărōn haBrīṯ

1972. This archipelago is mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea as containing the island of Menuthias, which may refer to Unguja. Prior to colonization, the village of Kizimkazi was a major node of commerce in this archipelago, which was conquered by the forces of Ruy Marques. The Portuguese colonized this archipelago by building a fort on Pemba Island, which was later brought under the influence of the Sultanate of Oman. For ten points, name this archipelago in East Africa, unified in 1964 with the state of Tanganyika to form Tanzania.
Answer: Zanzibar (or Zinjibār) BONUS: The inhabitants of Zanzibar primarily speak which Bantu language, still spoken in much of East Africa alongside English? Swahili (

1973. Ideology it targeted, of which the Soviet Union was an advocate.
Answer: Communism (

1974. Wisconsin politician who claimed to have a list of "hundreds" of traitorous people in the U.S. government.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy)

1975. Successor of Harry Truman who initially ignored the fear-mongering tactics of politicians.
Answer: Dwight D(avid) "Ike" Eisenhower

1976. FBI director who investigated his rival agency's heads at the CIA.
Answer: J(ohn) Edgar Hoover

1977. Couple executed for spying on the U.S., sending nuclear weapon designs to the Soviets.
Answer: Julius and Ethel Rosenberg (or the Rosenbergs)

1978. Name for men like Dalton Trumbo who refused to name anti-capitalists in the entertainment industry.
Answer: "Hollywood Ten" (

1979. Collective class of commoners who agitated for rights.
Answer: Plebeians (

1980. Early road which connected Rome to Brundisium, named for a 3rd century censor.
Answer: Via Appia (

1981. King of Epirus who won a costly victory after he invaded the Italian mainland.
Answer: Pyrrhus of Epirus (

1982. Final king, deposed in favor of establishing a Republican government.
Answer: Tarquinius Superbus (or Tarquin the Proud)

1983. Early foundation of Republican law, initially unwritten, which stated the rights and requirements of citizens.
Answer: Laws of the Twelve Tables

1984. Gallic chief who stated "Woe to the Conquered" while extracting tribute from Rome in 390 BC.
Answer: Brennus

1985. Traveler to Yuan China who coined the term "Old Man of the Mountain" for their leader.
Answer: Marco Polo (or Marco Emilio Polo)

1986. Asian Steppes empire whose sack of Alamut in the mid-13th century led to their downfall.
Answer: Mongol Empire (or Mongolians; or Mongols)

1987. Ayyubid sultan and rival of Richard the Lionheart who was wounded by Assassins during the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (

1988. Cannabis-derived drug supposedly used by them and from which their name is derived.
Answer: Hashish (

1989. Catholic "Knights" to whom they gave tribute, named for a medical facility in Jerusalem.
Answer: Knights Hospitaller (or Order of Knights of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem

1990. Subset of Shia Islam to which they adhered.
Answer: Isma'ilism (

1991. An oxygen meter manufactured by Arnold O. Beckman was based on the designs that this scientist created while working as a military researcher. This scientist and his wife, Ava, were the founders of the International League of Humanists. This scientist modified the valence (+) bond model and developed the concept of orbital hybridization. Winning the Nobel Peace Prize for his (*) activism against a nuclear arms race, for ten points, what scientist also won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on The Nature of the Chemical Bond?
Answer: Linus Pauling (or Linus Carl Pauling)

1992. Sam Mendes directed a film set in this country in which one character is stabbed to death by a downed pilot as another character seeks to fetch water. One director from this country created Captain von Rauffenstein in a film set in a prisoner-of-war camp during World War One titled (+) The Grand Illusion. A Christopher Nolan film set in this country partly takes place on land, in the air, and at (*) sea and chronicles the efforts of civilian boats to assist soldiers on a beach during World War Two. For ten points, name this nation, the setting of the films 1917 and Dunkirk.
Answer: Republic of France (or Republique francaise; or French Republic)

1993. The Indian grammarian Panini developed a system of this field that bears similarities to a type created by the author of The Laws of Thought. Used in a namesake type of algebra, this branch's Boolean (*) form uses values like true and false. The syllogism was developed by Aristotle while studying this field of thought. (*) For ten points, name this philosophical field with applications in math and computer science, the informal type of which studies the validity of arguments.
Answer: Logic (

1994. Elijah Coleman Bridgman was the first American missionary to this dynasty, after which he founded a Repository for this dynasty's politics and culture. Peter Parker served as a translator for a treaty between the U.S. and this dynasty negotiated by Caleb Cushing, (+) in which Americans attained extraterritoriality rights. This dynasty, which signed the Treaty of Wanghia [[WAHNG-YAH]], was the subject of a doctrine by John Hay encouraging (*) Western powers to keep an "open door." For ten points, name this dynasty, during which American troops were sent to China to halt the Boxer Rebellion.
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (or Great Qing; or Dà Qīng; or Daicing gurun)

1995. This archipelago was once believed to be a part of the continent Terra Australis. Early settlers in this archipelago include the Yaghan people. Julio Popper committed genocide against the native Selk’nam people of this archipelago. The Boundary Treaty (+) of 1881 defined the border of this archipelago and divided it between two countries. Divided between (*) Chile and Argentina, for ten points, what archipelago is located at the southernmost tip of South America?
Answer: Tierra del Fuego (

1996. During this war, the I-26 torpedoed Estevan Point Lighthouse in a successful bid to disrupt maritime trade. Men from one country who refused to fight overseas during this war were known as "Zombies," leading to the second Conscription (+) Crisis. During this war, Canadian divisions under Rod Keller were tasked with taking Juno (*) Beach. The Dominion of Canada was tasked with protecting the British dominion of Newfoundland during, for ten points, what war begun by a Nazi invasion of Poland?
Answer: World War Two (

1997. This man's father, Yakub, was a member of a Sipahi [[sih-PAH-hee]] cavalry unit that dislodged the Genoese [[jeh-noh-EEZ]] from Lesbos in the 15th century. Andrea Doria's unwillingness to deploy his personal fleet led to the Holy League's loss to this admiral at the Battle of (+) Preveza [[preh-VEH-zah]]. This admiral and brother of Aruj Reis [[ah-ROOJ reh-EES]] annexed the territory of Algiers while serving Suleiman the Magnificent. (*) For ten points, name this Barbary corsair named, in part, for his prominent red beard.
Answer: Hayreddin Barbarossa (or Hızır Hayrettin Pasha; or Hızır Reis)

1998. This individual’s tweet about receiving the COVID-19 vaccine was branded by Ted Cruz as “government propaganda.” Nearly 50 years earlier, this character was seen receiving an injection in a public service campaign to get more children vaccinated against measles. NASA invited this character to join the Challenger flight (+) to teach kids about space, and Mitt Romney said that he loves this character, despite wanting to cut taxpayer money from PBS (*). From 1969 to 2018, Caroll Spinney portrayed, for ten points, what Sesame Street character, an eight foot-tall avian?
Answer: Big Bird

1999. The Kentucky National Guard clashed with workers in this industry at the Battle of Evarts during the larger Harlan County Wars. Ten thousand armed men in this industry with support from the (+) UMW clashed with the strikebreakers known as the Logan Defenders at the Battle of Blair Mountain, the largest (*) labor uprising in U.S. history. Exposure to the "dust" of, for ten points, what mined resource causes "Black Lung" disease?
Answer: Coal (

2000. Upon the declaration of this war, Ohio congressman Joshua Giddings wrote an open letter to the president outlining how this war was against an "unoffending people" and a thinly veiled attempt to "safeguard slavery." One president was angry at a peace negotiator in this war for forgoing the acquisition of Baja California for fifteen million dollars in reparations from the government of Santa Anna. Nicholas Trist and future president José Joaquín de Herrera negotiated an end to, for ten points, what North American war, ended by the treaty of Guadeloupe Hidalgo?
Answer: Mexican-American War (or Intervención estadounidense en México)

2001. This man created a "Spirit Thermometer" filled with liquor to be displayed in the court of his patron, Ferdinando II de Medici. Pope Urban VIII's [[the eighth's]] inquisitors led an investigation against this man after he published “Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems.” A legend tells how this man dropped two balls of different masses off the Leaning Tower to test an Aristotelian hypothesis. Four moons of Jupiter are named for, for ten points, which Italian physicist and astronomer?
Answer: Galileo Galilei (or Galileo di Vincenzo Bonaiuti de' Galilei

2002. Description Acceptable. A dispute over who accomplished this feat led to the Smithsonian wrongly attributing it to engineer Samuel Langley. This feat, which lasted 59 seconds, was launched from an incline on Kill Devil Hill. Bicycle store employee Charlie Taylor built a lightweight gasoline motor to make this feat possible for the vessel Flyer I. Kitty Hawk, North Carolina was the sight of, for ten points, what feat accomplished by the Wright Brothers?
Answer: The First manned, powered Flight by the Wright Brothers (

2003. This man siphoned money to his family through a tax by which the ultra-wealthy were forced to donate to the Dana Sejahtera [[seh-jah-TEH-rah]] Mandiri fund. This man's ally, Ali Murtopo, incited riots to coincide with a visit by Japanese prime minister Kakuei Tanaka to discredit his rival Sumitro. The "Supersemar" Edict gave this general the right to restore order following a mid-1960s "Communist Purge" at the behest of his superior, Sukarno. The 1998 Riots in Jakarta led to the downfall of, for ten points, which dictator's "New Order" regime in Indonesia?
Answer: Suharto

2004. One hoax involving this event was the made-up shooting of Martin Šmíd [[SHMEED]] by police. Protesters during this event jingled keys to signify the unlocking of doors when Miloš Jakeš [[MEE-lohsh YAH-kehsh]] resigned as General Secretary. This event began on International Students' Day and ended when Gustáv Husák resigned and was replaced with the leader of the Charter 77 movement, Václav Havel. For ten points, name this revolution in 1989 that culminated with the ending of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia.
Answer: Velvet Revolution (or Gentle Revolution; or Sametová revoluce; or Nežná revolúcia)

2005. Nominoe became the first king of this region after he and his local Vannetais tribe supported Louis the Pious in the fight against his sibling Lothair. A duchess of this region name Anne of Monfort commissioned the tapestry Hunt of the Unicorn to commemorate her marriage to Louis XII [[the twelfth]]. This region, known as Breizh [[BREHSH]] in its native Celtic tongue, was ruled by Henry II son's Geoffrey from the city of Rennes [[REN]].The Edict of Nantes was signed in, for ten points, what region of Northwestern France?
Answer: Brittany (

2006. While representing this state, Nonpartisan League leader Lynn Frazier became the first state governor to be recalled from office. Another governor of this state, "Wild Bill" Langer, was convicted of defrauding the federal government by ordering state employees to donate to his party. When signing the papers to approve this state's statehood, James G. Blaine shuffled the papers with those of this state's southern neighbor. For ten points, name this Great Plains state, whose city of West Fargo hosts a recreational Old West town called Bonanzaville, USA.
Answer: North Dakota

2007. In the Neolithic period on this island, a group of standing stones likely meant to evoke fertility were rearranged by the Torrean [[toh-REH-ahn]] people at the Filitosa [[fee- lee-TOH-sah]] site. This island, which the launching point of the pro-De Gaulle Operation Resurrection, was ruled for nearly five hundred years by a republic in Liguria. The site of the Maison Bonaparte, the birthplace of Napoleon, for ten points, what is this French island department?
Answer: Corsica (or Corse)

2008. The name for this object was suggested by an eleven-year old, and other suggested names for it were Zeus and Percival. When this heavenly body was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, it disproved Percival Lowell's Planet X theory. Neil deGrasse Tyson said that allowing this object to be a planet would be an "insult" to the other planets. For ten points, name this trans-Neptunian dwarf planet in the Kuiper [[KY-per]] Belt that was once called the "Ninth Planet".
Answer: Pluto

2009. This man’s severed hands and head were displayed on the Rostra after his execution by Herennius and Popilius. When Clodius passed a law to deny him fire and water, this man went into exile in Thessalonica. Upon his return, this man attacked Mark Antony in several speeches, causing the Second Triumvirate to proscribe him as an enemy of the state. For ten points, name this optimate statesman, considered one of the finest orators in Roman history.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero

2010. The preaching background of this party's first leader led Morgan Phillips to comment, "Socialism in Britain owed more to Methodism than Marx." That founder of this party, Keir Hardie, resigned in favor of Arthur Henderson, who won the Nobel Peace Prize for chairing the Geneva Disarmament Conference. This party interrupted Winston Churchill's term as prime minister under the leadership of Clement Attlee. For ten points, name this currently center-left British political party, the opponent of the Conservatives.
Answer: Labour Party BONUS: Under the Attlee government, Labour minister Aneurin Bevan [[uh-NYE-rin BEH- vahn]] developed this government system that publicly funds hospitals and other social services throughout the United Kingdom.

2011. In response to an invasion along the Danube by this ruler, Mehmet II raised an army "second in size only" to the one that he used to conquer Constantinople. This ruler was captured by John Jiskra of Brandys under orders from Matthias Corvinus after this ruler disrespected the Ottomans by killing their messengers. This man’s brother, Mircea, was killed by the forces of John Hunyadi. The title of Voivode was held by this man, who ruled over Wallachia and was known for his use of stakes in dealing with enemies. For ten points, name this Romanian ruler who inspired a similarly named literary vampire.
Answer: Vlad the Impaler (or Vlad Tepes; or Vlad III

2012. Until 1997, this president's cabinet included a man nicknamed "Nothing Wrong Norman," who formerly headed the Commercial Farmers' Union and repeatedly denied racial divisions under this man's regime. This man's government imprisoned rival Canaan Banana on sodomy charges and launched the "drive out the trash" movement to destroy slums. In 2017, Emmerson Mnangagwa [[meh-nahn-GAH-gwah]] overthrew this president. Presiding in a time of hyperinflation in the 2000s, for ten points, who was this longtime dictator of Zimbabwe?
Answer: Robert Mugabe (or Robert Gabriel Mugabe) BONUS: Mugabe was a member of what ethnic group, whose ancestors built Great Zimbabwe in the Middle Ages? Shona (

2013. To cover up the nature of this event, Manucher Ghorbanifar suggested justifying it by freeing hostages held by Hezbollah. This event was investigated by the Tower Commission and led to the conviction of Oliver North. This event violated the Boland Amendment and was carried out in order to support an anti-communist Nicaraguan paramilitary group. For ten points, identify this scandal that involved the Reagan administration selling arms to Ayatollah Khomeini’s government.
Answer: Iran-Contra Affair (

2014. John Flaxman reconstructed a silver-gilted example of these objects that was on display at George IV’s coronation. Eleven copies of these objects were ordered by Numa Pompilius to divert thieves from stealing the one that fell from heaven. According to Virgil in the Aeneid, one of these objects depicts the death of Mettius Fufetius and the capture of the Sabine Women. The origin of that object of this type was given as a gift to Aeneas by Vulcan in his war against the Rutulians. For ten points, what type of object included the ancilia and the aegis, used as a tool of defense?
Answer: Shields (

2015. A portion of this piece's manuscript that contained the words "Quam olim da capo" was stolen at the 1958 Brussels World's Fair. A bass soloist sings the same melody of an arpeggiated B-flat major trombone solo in this piece's "Tuba Mirum." The wife of this piece's composer, Constanze [[kohn-STAHN-tse]], kept quiet about the role of Franz Xaver Süssmayr [[SOO-smy-uh]] in completing its "Lacrimosa" that was left mostly unfinished after its composer's 1791 death. For ten points, name this mass for the dead by the composer of The Magic Flute.
Answer: Mozart’s Requiem (

2016. In a 1992 book, Graham Hancock claims that this item was, for a time, held in Lake Tana. Known as the tabot in the Ge’ez language, this item is said to be housed in a building dedicated to “Our Lady Mary of Zion." Replicas of this item are contained in each Tewahedo Church. The Kebra Nagast notes that Menelik brought this item to Ethiopia while a counterfeit copy lies in Israel. A church in the Tigray region is said to hold this object, which contains a rod belonging to Aaron. For ten points, name this golden chest said to contain the original tablets of the Ten Commandments.
Answer: Ark of the Covenant (or Ărōn haBrīṯ

2017. This archipelago is mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea as containing the island of Menuthias, which may refer to Unguja. Prior to colonization, the village of Kizimkazi was a major node of commerce in this archipelago, which was conquered by the forces of Ruy Marques. The Portuguese colonized this archipelago by building a fort on Pemba Island, which was later brought under the influence of the Sultanate of Oman. For ten points, name this archipelago in East Africa, unified in 1964 with the state of Tanganyika to form Tanzania.
Answer: Zanzibar (or Zinjibār) BONUS: The inhabitants of Zanzibar primarily speak which Bantu language, still spoken in much of East Africa alongside English? Swahili (

2018. Ideology it targeted, of which the Soviet Union was an advocate.
Answer: Communism (

2019. Wisconsin politician who claimed to have a list of "hundreds" of traitorous people in the U.S. government.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy)

2020. Successor of Harry Truman who initially ignored the fear-mongering tactics of politicians.
Answer: Dwight D(avid) "Ike" Eisenhower

2021. FBI director who investigated his rival agency's heads at the CIA.
Answer: J(ohn) Edgar Hoover

2022. Couple executed for spying on the U.S., sending nuclear weapon designs to the Soviets.
Answer: Julius and Ethel Rosenberg (or the Rosenbergs)

2023. Name for men like Dalton Trumbo who refused to name anti-capitalists in the entertainment industry.
Answer: "Hollywood Ten" (

2024. U.S. anti-Soviet counterintelligence effort which outed the espionage cabal known as the Cambridge Five.
Answer: Venona Project

2025. Law that criminalized advocating for the overthrow of the government, which was deemed mostly unconstitutional in Yates v. U.S..
Answer: Smith Act (or Alien Registration Act)

2026. Collective class of commoners who agitated for rights.
Answer: Plebeians (

2027. Early road which connected Rome to Brundisium, named for a 3rd century censor.
Answer: Via Appia (

2028. King of Epirus who won a costly victory after he invaded the Italian mainland.
Answer: Pyrrhus of Epirus (

2029. Final king, deposed in favor of establishing a Republican government.
Answer: Tarquinius Superbus (or Tarquin the Proud)

2030. Early foundation of Republican law, initially unwritten, which stated the rights and requirements of citizens.
Answer: Laws of the Twelve Tables

2031. Gallic chief who stated "Woe to the Conquered" while extracting tribute from Rome in 390 BC.
Answer: Brennus

2032. Embarrassing Roman loss during the Second Samnite War in which two consuls were forced to walk under a yoke after surrendering.
Answer: Battle of the Caudine Forks

2033. Patrician who supposedly single-handedly held the Pons Sublicius from Clusium, who aimed to overthrow the Republic.
Answer: Publius Horatius Cocles

2034. Traveler to Yuan China who coined the term "Old Man of the Mountain" for their leader.
Answer: Marco Polo (or Marco Emilio Polo)

2035. Asian Steppes empire whose sack of Alamut in the mid-13th century led to their downfall.
Answer: Mongol Empire (or Mongolians; or Mongols)

2036. Ayyubid sultan and rival of Richard the Lionheart who was wounded by Assassins during the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (

2037. Cannabis-derived drug supposedly used by them and from which their name is derived.
Answer: Hashish (

2038. Catholic "Knights" to whom they gave tribute, named for a medical facility in Jerusalem.
Answer: Knights Hospitaller (or Order of Knights of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem

2039. Subset of Shia Islam to which they adhered.
Answer: Isma'ilism (

2040. Founder of the order who conducted a prolonged war with the Seljuks.
Answer: Hassan as-Sabbāh (

2041. De facto king of Jerusalem whom they killed during the 3rd Crusade while disguised as Christian monks.
Answer: Conrad of Montferrat (or Conrad I; or Corrado del Monferrato; or Conrà ëd Monfrà)

2042. An oxygen meter manufactured by Arnold O. Beckman was based on the designs that this scientist created while working as a military researcher. This scientist and his wife, Ava, were the founders of the International League of Humanists. This scientist modified the valence (+) bond model and developed the concept of orbital hybridization. Winning the Nobel Peace Prize for his (*) activism against a nuclear arms race, for ten points, what scientist also won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on The Nature of the Chemical Bond?
Answer: Linus Pauling (or Linus Carl Pauling)

2043. Sam Mendes directed a film set in this country in which one character is stabbed to death by a downed pilot as another character seeks to fetch water. One director from this country created Captain von Rauffenstein in a film set in a prisoner-of-war camp during World War One titled (+) The Grand Illusion. A Christopher Nolan film set in this country partly takes place on land, in the air, and at (*) sea and chronicles the efforts of civilian boats to assist soldiers on a beach during World War Two. For ten points, name this nation, the setting of the films 1917 and Dunkirk.
Answer: Republic of France (or Republique francaise; or French Republic)

2044. The Indian grammarian Panini developed a system of this field that bears similarities to a type created by the author of The Laws of Thought. Used in a namesake type of algebra, this branch's Boolean (*) form uses values like true and false. The syllogism was developed by Aristotle while studying this field of thought. (*) For ten points, name this philosophical field with applications in math and computer science, the informal type of which studies the validity of arguments.
Answer: Logic (

2045. Elijah Coleman Bridgman was the first American missionary to this dynasty, after which he founded a Repository for this dynasty's politics and culture. Peter Parker served as a translator for a treaty between the U.S. and this dynasty negotiated by Caleb Cushing, (+) in which Americans attained extraterritoriality rights. This dynasty, which signed the Treaty of Wanghia [[WAHNG-YAH]], was the subject of a doctrine by John Hay encouraging (*) Western powers to keep an "open door." For ten points, name this dynasty, during which American troops were sent to China to halt the Boxer Rebellion.
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (or Great Qing; or Dà Qīng; or Daicing gurun)

2046. This archipelago was once believed to be a part of the continent Terra Australis. Early settlers in this archipelago include the Yaghan people. Julio Popper committed genocide against the native Selk’nam people of this archipelago. The Boundary Treaty (+) of 1881 defined the border of this archipelago and divided it between two countries. Divided between (*) Chile and Argentina, for ten points, what archipelago is located at the southernmost tip of South America?
Answer: Tierra del Fuego (

2047. During this war, the I-26 torpedoed Estevan Point Lighthouse in a successful bid to disrupt maritime trade. Men from one country who refused to fight overseas during this war were known as "Zombies," leading to the second Conscription (+) Crisis. During this war, Canadian divisions under Rod Keller were tasked with taking Juno (*) Beach. The Dominion of Canada was tasked with protecting the British dominion of Newfoundland during, for ten points, what war begun by a Nazi invasion of Poland?
Answer: World War Two (

2048. This man's father, Yakub, was a member of a Sipahi [[sih-PAH-hee]] cavalry unit that dislodged the Genoese [[jeh-noh-EEZ]] from Lesbos in the 15th century. Andrea Doria's unwillingness to deploy his personal fleet led to the Holy League's loss to this admiral at the Battle of (+) Preveza [[preh-VEH-zah]]. This admiral and brother of Aruj Reis [[ah-ROOJ reh-EES]] annexed the territory of Algiers while serving Suleiman the Magnificent. (*) For ten points, name this Barbary corsair named, in part, for his prominent red beard.
Answer: Hayreddin Barbarossa (or Hızır Hayrettin Pasha; or Hızır Reis)

2049. On national television, this politician stated "The Republic is not a dictatorship of rumours, a dictatorship of calumny" while dismissing his involvement in the Clearstream Affair. On Bastille Day, Unité Radicale member Maxime Brunerie (+) fired at this president in his motorcade. At the site of the Vel' d'Hiv [[vehl-DEEV]] Roundup, this politician gave a speech admitting French guilt in the Holocaust. The President of France for much of the (*) 90s and 2000s was, for ten points, what former head of the conservative Rally for the Republic Party?
Answer: Jacques Chirac (or Jacques René Chirac)

2050. The Kentucky National Guard clashed with workers in this industry at the Battle of Evarts during the larger Harlan County Wars. Ten thousand armed men in this industry with support from the (+) UMW clashed with the strikebreakers known as the Logan Defenders at the Battle of Blair Mountain, the largest (*) labor uprising in U.S. history. Exposure to the "dust" of, for ten points, what mined resource causes "Black Lung" disease?
Answer: Coal (

2051. Inmates at the Prison of the Annamites in this department revolted against poor conditions in Inini. In the 1880s, this region fought a border-war with Brazil over the independent state of Counani. A man cried "Long live France! Long live the Army!" after being sentenced to life imprisonment in a penal colony in this region, from which Henri Charrière [[shah-ree-YAY]] escaped, as recounted in his novel Papillon [[pah-pee-YOHN]]. The European Space Agency constructed its primary space center in , for ten points, what French overseas region, where Alfred Dreyfus was imprisoned on Devil’s Island.
Answer: French Guiana (

2052. This man is the subject of a work by Joseph Califano titled The Triumph and Tragedy of [this man], and over 400 collections of manuscripts were relied upon by Robert Dalleck in another biography of this man. A four-volume series, including such entries as The Passage of Power and Master of the Senate, was written about this one-time Speaker of the House. For ten points, Robert Caro wrote that four-volume biography of what man who took the presidential oath on an airplane?
Answer: Lyndon B(aines) Johnson (

2053. This monarch appointed Edward Courtenay, 1st Earl of Devon, royal envoy to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V but rejected his ambition for the throne. Robert Aske led a popular revolt, known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, aiming to restore this royal to the English line of succession. Phillip II of Spain used his marriage to this daughter of Catherine of Aragon as a pretext to invade the British Isles in the 1580s. The English Reformation was nearly undone by, for ten points, what "Bloody" queen of the Tudor Dynasty, the sister of Elizabeth I?
Answer: Mary I (or Mary Tudor

2054. While jailed for being a dissident during this war, Wole Soyinka wrote several protest poems on toilet paper. Political dominance by the Muslim Hausa-Fulani people led to this conflict, which began when officer Odumegwu Ojukwu [[oh-duh-MEHG-woo oh-JOO-kwoo]] revolted against a Lagos-based government. A namesake Igbo breakaway region agitated for independence in, for the point, which 1960s war in southeastern Nigeria?
Answer: Biafra War (

2055. Despite confirming the presence of German troops at this structure, U.S. Army sergeant Leon Weckstein prevented it from being targeted by an artillery strike after finding it too beautiful to destroy. Galileo Galilei supposedly tested his law of free fall by dropping two cannonballs of different masses from this structure. For ten points, what landmark in Pisa, Italy is tilted at nearly four degrees?
Answer: Leaning Tower of Pisa (or Torre Pendente di Pisa)

2056. In this empire's chronology, the phrase "the king who lived in tents" is used to refer to its first domestic rulers, beginning with Tudiya. The practice of deporting hostile ethnic groups was introduced by Shalmaneser I, a king of this empire, following his conquest of the Mitanni. The fields of Susa were sown with salt following a humiliation inflicted by the Elamites on this empire's people, resulting in that violent act by Ashurbanipal. The city of Assur served as the capital of, for ten points, what Mesopotamian empire of Sargon II and Sennacherib [[seh-NAH-keh-rib]]?
Answer: Assyrian Empire (or Assyrians

2057. Two answers required. These two nations disputed control of the Guano-rich Pacific atoll of Clipperton Island. Chef Remontel, a citizen of one of these nations, had his Tacubaya bakery looted by troops from the other nation, sparking the 19th-century Pastry War. One of these two nations propped up the reign of Maximilian I, an Austrian Habsburg who seized control of the other nation after overthrowing Benito Juárez [[HWAH-rez]]. The monarch of one of these nations, Napoleon III, invaded, for ten points, what other nation after they defaulted on a loan of 600,000 pesos?
Answer: France and Mexico (

2058. In 2017, the ARSA military organization launched attacks in this country's Arakan, or Rakhine, State. This country's government conducted Operation Dragon King under the orders of the socialist dictator Ne Win. In February 2021, a leader of this country, who had earlier won the Nobel Peace Prize, was overthrown in a Tatmadaw coup. For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country formerly led by Aung San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] where over 500,000 Muslim Royhinga refugees have fled to neighboring Bangladesh since 2017.
Answer: Myanmar (or Republic of the Union of Myanmar; or Pyidaunzu Thanmăda Myăma Nainngandaw

2059. A member of this family was Colonial Secretary during the Second Boer War and co- founded the Liberal Unionist Party. Another member of this family signed the Easter Accords, legitimizing Italy's conquest of Ethiopia and told an audience to "sleep quietly in your beds" after attending a conference that he claimed created "peace for our time." The appeasement policy over the Nazi annexation of the Sudetenland was created by a member of this family at the Munich Pact. For ten points, name this family of 1930s prime minister Neville.
Answer: Chamberlain family (or the Chamberlains

2060. Bayezid II claimed that this edict was foolish since it “[gave him the] national treasure” of one country. This edict gave rise to a “crypto” group that continued the practice it sought to ban by July 31st of the year it was ordered. A campaign conducted a century prior by Ferrand Martinez aimed to accomplish the same result as this edict, which sought to curb its non-converso population. Preceded by a number of pogroms against the Sephardi, for ten points, what was this edict which expelled the Jews from Spain?
Answer: Alhambra Decree (

2061. In the Spring and Autumn Annals, this specific term is used to refer to anyone living in the "Outside Land" beyond the realm of imperial China. This English word derives from an ancient Greek antonym for "citizen" and was used to describe all non-Greeks because their languages supposedly sounded like gibberish. For ten points, name this pejorative term, which the Romans used to refer to any "uncivilized" tribal groups beyond their borders.
Answer: Barbarians (

2062. In the hopes of helping a certain species avoid the plague, scientists performed this procedure on a black-footed ferret named Willa. Early steps towards understanding this process included the discovery of embryotic induction by German scientist Hans Spemann [[SHPEH-mahn]]. The Roslin Institute in Scotland managed to perform this process on a mammal for the first time with a sheep named Dolly. For ten points, name this biological process of producing organisms with matching DNA.
Answer: Cloning (

2063. This object was described as “hairy and fierce” by Bartolomeo of Platina. During a campaign in Belgrade, this object supposedly led "[mathematicians to declare] that there would follow grievous pestilence." This object was referred to as an “Instrument of the Devil” by Pope Callixtus III, who excommunicated it. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle describes this object as a “portent...from the heavens” that appeared prior to the Battle of Hastings. Compared by Giotto to the star of Bethlehem, for ten points, what is this regularly appearing comet?
Answer: Halley’s Comet (

2064. This U.S. armed forces branch traces its history to a force raised by Samuel Nicholas, who, with Esek Hopkins, orchestrated the capture of Nassau. This branch claims that their dress uniform's "blood stripe" memorializes the fallen at Chapultepec [[CHAH-puhl-TEH- pek]] Castle. This branch was led by Presley O'Bannon in one battle, which is immortalized in its namesake "Hymn." For ten points, name this U.S. armed forces branch that has fought "from the halls of Montezuma to the shores of Tripoli."
Answer: United

2065. The creation of this state was preceded by the assassination of a military leader called the “Old Marshal.” The erroneous belief that the pope established diplomatic relations with this state is partly attributed to a film directed by Bernardo Bertolucci. That film, The Last Emperor, is about a leader of this state who ruled during the Kangde era. Harbin was the largest city in this state, where the Han formed a majority despite this state being named for a different ethnic group. For ten points, name this Japanese puppet state in China.
Answer: Manchukuo (

2066. John Gregory Tierney was the first casualty during this project, in which rocks were cleared by a group of “high scalers.” A political cartoon reading “It Can’t Be Done, Mr. Ickes [[IK-ees]]!” references the naming dispute over this project, which Six Companies, Inc. won a bidding war to carry out. Found in the Black Canyon, this structure spans both Mohave and Clark Counties and impounded the Lake Mead reservoir. Located near Las Vegas, for ten points, what is this Depression-era project named for a Republican president?
Answer: Hoover Dam (

2067. Incumbent president and former actor who won the election.
Answer: Ronald Reagan (or Ronald Wilson Reagan)

2068. Former vice-president from Minnesota who won only his home state and D.C.
Answer: Walter "Fritz" Mondale (or Walter Frederick "Fritz" Mondale)

2069. First American to orbit the Earth who lost in the Democratic primaries while serving as a senator from Ohio.
Answer: John Glenn (or John Herschel Glenn Jr.)

2070. Amendment planning to end legal distinctions between men and women which the Democratic candidate claimed he would pass if elected.
Answer: Equal Rights Amendment (

2071. New York representative who was the first female candidate on the presidential ticket of a major party.
Answer: Geraldine Ferraro (or Geraldine Anne Ferraro)

2072. Wandering animal depicted "In the Woods" in an early Republican ad to represent the faltering Soviet Union.
Answer: Bears (or "There is a Bear in the Woods.")

2073. Explorer who circled the Cape of Good Hope and was the first European to reach India by sea.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

2074. Their largest colony in the New World, discovered by Pedro Cabral.
Answer: Brazil (or Brasil)

2075. 15th century treaty they made with Spain which demarcated the world into two colonial regions.
Answer: Treaty of Tordesillas (or Tratado de Tordesillas; or Tratado de Tordesilhas)

2076. City-state in Southern China, leased for 500 taels beginning in the 16th century.
Answer: Macau (or Macao)

2077. City in India seized by the Nehru administration in Operation Vijay.
Answer: Goa (

2078. African colony that immediately descended into civil war between the MPLA and UNITA factions after independence.
Answer: Republic of Angola (or República de Angola

2079. Port on Table Bay and one of the modern capitals of South Africa first settled by their ancestors.
Answer: Cape Town (

2080. Language the speak which evolved from Dutch.
Answer: Afrikaans

2081. Prime Minister of the UK during World War Two who was taken prisoner after a Boer ambush.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)

2082. British general who expanded concentration camps and appeared on World War One posters stating "[this man] wants you!"
Answer: Lord Kitchener (or Horatio Herbert Kitchener; or 1st Earl Kitchener)

2083. President of the Transvaal who successfully halted the Jameson Raid.
Answer: Paul Kruger (or Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger)

2084. First prime minister of independent South Africa who fought in the Second Boer War.
Answer: Louis Botha [[LOO-ee BOO-tuh]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

2085. This occupation, which began under the Medicis in the 16th century, includes Janet Collins, who refused to work for a company in Monte Carlo since she would have had to paint her face and skin white. A group of five Native American women in this profession, including Myra Yvonne (+) Chouteau and Rosella Hightower, were named the Five Moons. The short-term wife of George Balanchine, (*) Maria Tallchief, held this profession. For ten points, name this profession of Misty Copeland, who became the first African-American principal of ABT after performing in works like Tchaikovsky's The Sleeping Beauty.
Answer: Ballerina (

2086. A leader of this group formed the town of Jerusalem near Penn Yan and attracted young followers known as "Universal." That leader of this group shunned their birth name and gendered pronouns and was known as Public Universal Friend. (+) A founder of a colony of this group signed a peace treaty at Shackamaxon with the Lenape [[leh-NAH-pee]] chief, Tamanend. That man, who was given land by Charles II as debt repayment, befriended a founder of this religious group, George (*) Fox. For ten points, name this Christian sect followed by William Penn.
Answer: Quakers (

2087. Despite outnumbering an opposing force by roughly five to one, this organization lost over one-fourth of its members who participated in the Siege of Clonmel. George Monck led one part of this group with whom the Agitators and the Levellers argued (+) over the form of its country’s constitution during the Putney Debates. Eschewing tents, this group often quartered in nearby buildings and employed dragoons in battles at Dunbar and Preston. Supporting the (*) Protectorate, for ten points, what was this army created by the reform-minded Oliver Cromwell?
Answer: New Model Army (

2088. A section of this region is named for a British ship expedition captained by George Nares which first sounded the depths of this region in 1875. Don Walsh and Jacques Piccard were the first to descend into this region in the Trieste. (+) This region was designated a U.S. National Monument in 2009, and in 2012 James Cameron performed a solo descent into its (*) lowest point, Challenger Deep. For ten points, name this crescent-shaped Pacific Ocean trench, the deepest in the world.
Answer: Marianas Trench (

2089. Jozef Groll became a key innovator in this industry by using a "noble" ingredient produced near the city of Žatec [[ZHAH-tek]], or Saaz. A trademark dispute in this industry featured uses of the name of the city of České-Budějovice [[CHES-keh boo- DEH-yoh-vit-seh]]. Carl (+) von Linde's development of refrigeration essentially eliminated this industry's use of caves for storage. One of the most important laws regulating this industry was the Reinheitsgebot [[rine-HITES-geh-boht]], which was adopted in (*) Bavaria in 1516. For ten points, name this industry whose 19th century German-American titans included Eberhard Anheuser and Adolphus Busch.
Answer: Beer industry (

2090. This man built La Catedral prison, where he falsely agreed to a serve a five-year prison sentence to avoid extradition. This owner of Hacienda Nápoles ordered the bombing of Avianca (+) Flight 203, as well as the bombing of the DAS Building. Hugo Martinez led the First Search Bloc to capture this man, who was nicknamed "the King (*) of Cocaine." For ten points, name this Colombian drug lord and billionaire who founded the Medellin [[med-eh-YEEN]] Cartel.
Answer: Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria

2091. Thomas Edison declared that he was afraid of this man’s discovery after one of his assistants had to get both of their arms amputated and died shortly after. An apparatus consisting of a Crookes tube and a screen painted with barium platinocyanide (+) led to this scientist’s most notable discovery. This scientist’s wife reportedly exclaimed, “I have seen my death!” after examining a photograph (*) of her hand. Lending his name to a type of radiation, for ten points, what German physicist discovered the X-ray?
Answer: Wilhelm Röntgen (or Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen

2092. This movement forced Sultan Abdul Hamid II to revive the parliamentary period in 1908, shortly after this entity organized the Committee of Union and Progress. Operation Nemesis was a retaliatory mission to assassinate the Three Pashas (+) of this organization, successfully targeting both Mehmed Talaat Pasha and Cemal [[keh-MAHL]] Pasha. The Assyrian and (*) Armenian genocides during the First World War were executed by, for ten points, what revolutionary group in charge of the Ottoman Empire immediately prior to its dissolution?
Answer: Young Turks (

2093. The Treaty Tree in this city was the site of a peace agreement that followed the Battle of Blaauwberg. This port experienced an influx of immigrants during gold rushes in Griqualand West and Witwatersrand. Being granted its own parliament in 1854, this city's colony was unified with Natal and two Boer Republics in 1910. The Langa township in this city was once a central site of force relocation during Apartheid. For ten points, name this oldest and second-largest city in South Africa.
Answer: Cape Town (

2094. Inmates at the Prison of the Annamites in this department revolted against poor conditions in Inini. In the 1880s, this region fought a border-war with Brazil over the independent state of Counani. A man cried "Long live France! Long live the Army!" after being sentenced to life imprisonment in a penal colony in this region, from which Henri Charrière [[shah-ree-YAY]] escaped, as recounted in his novel Papillon [[pah-pee-YOHN]]. The European Space Agency constructed its primary space center in , for ten points, what French overseas region, where Alfred Dreyfus was imprisoned on Devil’s Island.
Answer: French Guiana (

2095. This man is the subject of a work by Joseph Califano titled The Triumph and Tragedy of [this man], and over 400 collections of manuscripts were relied upon by Robert Dalleck in another biography of this man. A four-volume series, including such entries as The Passage of Power and Master of the Senate, was written about this one-time Speaker of the House. For ten points, Robert Caro wrote that four-volume biography of what man who took the presidential oath on an airplane?
Answer: Lyndon B(aines) Johnson (

2096. This monarch appointed Edward Courtenay, 1st Earl of Devon, royal envoy to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V but rejected his ambition for the throne. Robert Aske led a popular revolt, known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, aiming to restore this royal to the English line of succession. Phillip II of Spain used his marriage to this daughter of Catherine of Aragon as a pretext to invade the British Isles in the 1580s. The English Reformation was nearly undone by, for ten points, what "Bloody" queen of the Tudor Dynasty, the sister of Elizabeth I?
Answer: Mary I (or Mary Tudor

2097. This politician justified the use of force during colonization efforts in his "Report on Algeria," written during Algerian occupation by the army of King Louis Philippe. This man wrote about the disconnection between the hereditary nobility and rural peasant leading to the disintegration of the Ancien Régime [[ahn-SHYAHN reh-ZHEEM]] in The Old Regime and the Revolution. This man also collected data for a book while ostensibly on a tour of U.S. prisons. For ten points, name this French aristocrat and author of Democracy in America.
Answer: Alexis de Tocqueville (or Alexis Charles Henri Clérel, comte de Tocqueville)

2098. In 1980, this state's Lake Peigneur was contaminated when an oil rig hit a salt mine, making the water brackish. Edwin Edwards served four terms as governor of this state and won one election with the slogan "Vote for the lizard, not the wizard" while campaigning against KKK Grand Wizard David Duke. The "Share Our Wealth" program was advocated by a governor of this state whom Robert Penn Warren called a "Dictator." Huey Long once governed, for ten points, what Bayou State?
Answer: Louisiana

2099. In this empire's chronology, the phrase "the king who lived in tents" is used to refer to its first domestic rulers, beginning with Tudiya. The practice of deporting hostile ethnic groups was introduced by Shalmaneser I, a king of this empire, following his conquest of the Mitanni. The fields of Susa were sown with salt following a humiliation inflicted by the Elamites on this empire's people, resulting in that violent act by Ashurbanipal. The city of Assur served as the capital of, for ten points, what Mesopotamian empire of Sargon II and Sennacherib [[seh-NAH-keh-rib]]?
Answer: Assyrian Empire (or Assyrians

2100. Two answers required. These two nations disputed control of the Guano-rich Pacific atoll of Clipperton Island. Chef Remontel, a citizen of one of these nations, had his Tacubaya bakery looted by troops from the other nation, sparking the 19th-century Pastry War. One of these two nations propped up the reign of Maximilian I, an Austrian Habsburg who seized control of the other nation after overthrowing Benito Juárez [[HWAH-rez]]. The monarch of one of these nations, Napoleon III, invaded, for ten points, what other nation after they defaulted on a loan of 600,000 pesos?
Answer: France and Mexico (

2101. In 2017, the ARSA military organization launched attacks in this country's Arakan, or Rakhine, State. This country's government conducted Operation Dragon King under the orders of the socialist dictator Ne Win. In February 2021, a leader of this country, who had earlier won the Nobel Peace Prize, was overthrown in a Tatmadaw coup. For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country formerly led by Aung San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] where over 500,000 Muslim Royhinga refugees have fled to neighboring Bangladesh since 2017.
Answer: Myanmar (or Republic of the Union of Myanmar; or Pyidaunzu Thanmăda Myăma Nainngandaw

2102. In reference to this figure, scientist Olesya Turkina said, "We did not learn enough from the mission to justify the death of [this astronaut]." A monument depicts this figure cradled by hands whose digits double as rockets, a part of the larger "Monument to the Conquerors of Space." Scientist Vladimir Yazdovsky trained this cosmonaut to eat a specialized gel and kept her in progressively smaller cages to prep her for spaceflight. The term "Muttnik" was given to, for ten points, what Moscow stray dog, the first animal to orbit earth?
Answer: Laika [[LYE-kah]] (

2103. An ancient inscription banning this event was discovered in Tiriolo, Italy in 1640. Investigations of these events were conducted by Spurius Postumius Albinus [[ahl-BEE- nooss]] and Quintus Marcius Philippus. Hispala Faecenia [[fay-keh-NEE-ah]] was awarded 100,000 bronze coins for giving her testimony about these events. The Legislation of 186 states that these events were to be overlooked by the Senate. Traditions of these events were accounted for by Livy in his History of Rome. For ten points, what unofficial festivals celebrated the Greco-Roman god of wine?
Answer: Bacchanalia (

2104. A member of this family was Colonial Secretary during the Second Boer War and co- founded the Liberal Unionist Party. Another member of this family signed the Easter Accords, legitimizing Italy's conquest of Ethiopia and told an audience to "sleep quietly in your beds" after attending a conference that he claimed created "peace for our time." The appeasement policy over the Nazi annexation of the Sudetenland was created by a member of this family at the Munich Pact. For ten points, name this family of 1930s prime minister Neville.
Answer: Chamberlain family (or the Chamberlains

2105. Bayezid II claimed that this edict was foolish since it “[gave him the] national treasure” of one country. This edict gave rise to a “crypto” group that continued the practice it sought to ban by July 31st of the year it was ordered. A campaign conducted a century prior by Ferrand Martinez aimed to accomplish the same result as this edict, which sought to curb its non-converso population. Preceded by a number of pogroms against the Sephardi, for ten points, what was this edict which expelled the Jews from Spain?
Answer: Alhambra Decree (

2106. In the Spring and Autumn Annals, this specific term is used to refer to anyone living in the "Outside Land" beyond the realm of imperial China. This English word derives from an ancient Greek antonym for "citizen" and was used to describe all non-Greeks because their languages supposedly sounded like gibberish. For ten points, name this pejorative term, which the Romans used to refer to any "uncivilized" tribal groups beyond their borders.
Answer: Barbarians (

2107. In the hopes of helping a certain species avoid the plague, scientists performed this procedure on a black-footed ferret named Willa. Early steps towards understanding this process included the discovery of embryotic induction by German scientist Hans Spemann [[SHPEH-mahn]]. The Roslin Institute in Scotland managed to perform this process on a mammal for the first time with a sheep named Dolly. For ten points, name this biological process of producing organisms with matching DNA.
Answer: Cloning (

2108. This object was described as “hairy and fierce” by Bartolomeo of Platina. During a campaign in Belgrade, this object supposedly led "[mathematicians to declare] that there would follow grievous pestilence." This object was referred to as an “Instrument of the Devil” by Pope Callixtus III, who excommunicated it. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle describes this object as a “portent...from the heavens” that appeared prior to the Battle of Hastings. Compared by Giotto to the star of Bethlehem, for ten points, what is this regularly appearing comet?
Answer: Halley’s Comet (

2109. This U.S. armed forces branch traces its history to a force raised by Samuel Nicholas, who, with Esek Hopkins, orchestrated the capture of Nassau. This branch claims that their dress uniform's "blood stripe" memorializes the fallen at Chapultepec [[CHAH-puhl-TEH- pek]] Castle. This branch was led by Presley O'Bannon in one battle, which is immortalized in its namesake "Hymn." For ten points, name this U.S. armed forces branch that has fought "from the halls of Montezuma to the shores of Tripoli."
Answer: United

2110. The creation of this state was preceded by the assassination of a military leader called the “Old Marshal.” The erroneous belief that the pope established diplomatic relations with this state is partly attributed to a film directed by Bernardo Bertolucci. That film, The Last Emperor, is about a leader of this state who ruled during the Kangde era. Harbin was the largest city in this state, where the Han formed a majority despite this state being named for a different ethnic group. For ten points, name this Japanese puppet state in China.
Answer: Manchukuo (

2111. John Gregory Tierney was the first casualty during this project, in which rocks were cleared by a group of “high scalers.” A political cartoon reading “It Can’t Be Done, Mr. Ickes [[IK-ees]]!” references the naming dispute over this project, which Six Companies, Inc. won a bidding war to carry out. Found in the Black Canyon, this structure spans both Mohave and Clark Counties and impounded the Lake Mead reservoir. Located near Las Vegas, for ten points, what is this Depression-era project named for a Republican president?
Answer: Hoover Dam (

2112. Incumbent president and former actor who won the election.
Answer: Ronald Reagan (or Ronald Wilson Reagan)

2113. Former vice-president from Minnesota who won only his home state and D.C.
Answer: Walter "Fritz" Mondale (or Walter Frederick "Fritz" Mondale)

2114. First American to orbit the Earth who lost in the Democratic primaries while serving as a senator from Ohio.
Answer: John Glenn (or John Herschel Glenn Jr.)

2115. Amendment planning to end legal distinctions between men and women which the Democratic candidate claimed he would pass if elected.
Answer: Equal Rights Amendment (

2116. New York representative who was the first female candidate on the presidential ticket of a major party.
Answer: Geraldine Ferraro (or Geraldine Anne Ferraro)

2117. Wandering animal depicted "In the Woods" in an early Republican ad to represent the faltering Soviet Union.
Answer: Bears (or "There is a Bear in the Woods.")

2118. Wendy's slogan used by a Democrat to cast doubt on Gary Hart's proposed programs.
Answer: "Where's the Beef?"

2119. Opening line of an ad campaign, formally known as "Prouder, Stronger, Better," which depicted people happily going to work.
Answer: Morning in America (

2120. Explorer who circled the Cape of Good Hope and was the first European to reach India by sea.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

2121. Their largest colony in the New World, discovered by Pedro Cabral.
Answer: Brazil (or Brasil)

2122. 15th century treaty they made with Spain which demarcated the world into two colonial regions.
Answer: Treaty of Tordesillas (or Tratado de Tordesillas; or Tratado de Tordesilhas)

2123. City-state in Southern China, leased for 500 taels beginning in the 16th century.
Answer: Macau (or Macao)

2124. City in India seized by the Nehru administration in Operation Vijay.
Answer: Goa (

2125. African colony that immediately descended into civil war between the MPLA and UNITA factions after independence.
Answer: Republic of Angola (or República de Angola

2126. Island in the Persian Gulf conquered by General Afonso de Albuquerque to control trade in a namesake strait.
Answer: Hormuz (or Ormuz

2127. King known as "The Fortunate" who created the India Armadas to control the spice trade and promoted the expansion of the overseas empire.
Answer: Manuel I of Portugal (or Manoel I; or Manuel the Fortunate)

2128. Port on Table Bay and one of the modern capitals of South Africa first settled by their ancestors.
Answer: Cape Town (

2129. Language the speak which evolved from Dutch.
Answer: Afrikaans

2130. Prime Minister of the UK during World War Two who was taken prisoner after a Boer ambush.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)

2131. British general who expanded concentration camps and appeared on World War One posters stating "[this man] wants you!"
Answer: Lord Kitchener (or Horatio Herbert Kitchener; or 1st Earl Kitchener)

2132. President of the Transvaal who successfully halted the Jameson Raid.
Answer: Paul Kruger (or Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger)

2133. First prime minister of independent South Africa who fought in the Second Boer War.
Answer: Louis Botha [[LOO-ee BOO-tuh]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

2134. Treaty in which they agreed to swear fealty to Britain following the Second Boer War.
Answer: Treaty of Vereeniging

2135. Victory for Voortrekkers against the Zulu under Dingane [[dihn-GAH-neh]], which included the use of the wagonlaager.
Answer: Battle of Blood River

2136. This occupation, which began under the Medicis in the 16th century, includes Janet Collins, who refused to work for a company in Monte Carlo since she would have had to paint her face and skin white. A group of five Native American women in this profession, including Myra Yvonne (+) Chouteau and Rosella Hightower, were named the Five Moons. The short-term wife of George Balanchine, (*) Maria Tallchief, held this profession. For ten points, name this profession of Misty Copeland, who became the first African-American principal of ABT after performing in works like Tchaikovsky's The Sleeping Beauty.
Answer: Ballerina (

2137. A leader of this group formed the town of Jerusalem near Penn Yan and attracted young followers known as "Universal." That leader of this group shunned their birth name and gendered pronouns and was known as Public Universal Friend. (+) A founder of a colony of this group signed a peace treaty at Shackamaxon with the Lenape [[leh-NAH-pee]] chief, Tamanend. That man, who was given land by Charles II as debt repayment, befriended a founder of this religious group, George (*) Fox. For ten points, name this Christian sect followed by William Penn.
Answer: Quakers (

2138. Despite outnumbering an opposing force by roughly five to one, this organization lost over one-fourth of its members who participated in the Siege of Clonmel. George Monck led one part of this group with whom the Agitators and the Levellers argued (+) over the form of its country’s constitution during the Putney Debates. Eschewing tents, this group often quartered in nearby buildings and employed dragoons in battles at Dunbar and Preston. Supporting the (*) Protectorate, for ten points, what was this army created by the reform-minded Oliver Cromwell?
Answer: New Model Army (

2139. A section of this region is named for a British ship expedition captained by George Nares which first sounded the depths of this region in 1875. Don Walsh and Jacques Piccard were the first to descend into this region in the Trieste. (+) This region was designated a U.S. National Monument in 2009, and in 2012 James Cameron performed a solo descent into its (*) lowest point, Challenger Deep. For ten points, name this crescent-shaped Pacific Ocean trench, the deepest in the world.
Answer: Marianas Trench (

2140. Jozef Groll became a key innovator in this industry by using a "noble" ingredient produced near the city of Žatec [[ZHAH-tek]], or Saaz. A trademark dispute in this industry featured uses of the name of the city of České-Budějovice [[CHES-keh boo-DEH-yoh-vit-seh]]. Carl (+) von Linde's development of refrigeration essentially eliminated this industry's use of caves for storage. One of the most important laws regulating this industry was the Reinheitsgebot [[rine-HITES-geh-boht]], which was adopted in (*) Bavaria in 1516. For ten points, name this industry whose 19th century German-American titans included Eberhard Anheuser and Adolphus Busch.
Answer: Beer industry (

2141. Following the Évian Conference, this leader donated over 20,000 acres of land for 1,000 Jewish refugees escaping Europe in the late 1930s. This man's personal hatred for Venezuelan president Romulo (+) Betancourt led to several state- sponsored assassination attempts. This man, who was known by supporters as (*) El Jefe [[HEH-feh]], changed the name of Santo Domingo to his own name in 1936. For ten points, name this leader who ordered the Parsley Massacre, a 20th-century dictator of the Dominican Republic.
Answer: Rafael Trujillo (or Rafael Leónidas Trujillo Molina

2142. Thomas Edison declared that he was afraid of this man’s discovery after one of his assistants had to get both of their arms amputated and died shortly after. An apparatus consisting of a Crookes tube and a screen painted with barium platinocyanide (+) led to this scientist’s most notable discovery. This scientist’s wife reportedly exclaimed, “I have seen my death!” after examining a photograph (*) of her hand. Lending his name to a type of radiation, for ten points, what German physicist discovered the X-ray?
Answer: Wilhelm Röntgen (or Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen

2143. This movement forced Sultan Abdul Hamid II to revive the parliamentary period in 1908, shortly after this entity organized the Committee of Union and Progress. Operation Nemesis was a retaliatory mission to assassinate the Three Pashas (+) of this organization, successfully targeting both Mehmed Talaat Pasha and Cemal [[keh-MAHL]] Pasha. The Assyrian and (*) Armenian genocides during the First World War were executed by, for ten points, what revolutionary group in charge of the Ottoman Empire immediately prior to its dissolution?
Answer: Young Turks (

2144. The Treaty Tree in this city was the site of a peace agreement that followed the Battle of Blaauwberg. This port experienced an influx of immigrants during gold rushes in Griqualand West and Witwatersrand. Being granted its own parliament in 1854, this city's colony was unified with Natal and two Boer Republics in 1910. The Langa township in this city was once a central site of force relocation during Apartheid. For ten points, name this oldest and second-largest city in South Africa.
Answer: Cape Town (

2145. An anachronism in a film about this historical figure involved the appearance of a pair of purple Converse sneakers during a shopping spree. A musical by Michael Kunze and Sylvester Levay parallels the life of this historical figure with a woman named Margrid Arnaud. A 2006 film directed by Sofia Coppola portrayed this figure’s affair with Axel von Fersen. For ten points, what historical figure was the wife of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]] and last queen of France before the French Revolution?
Answer: Marie Antoinette (or Marie Antoinette Josèphe Jeanne; or Maria Antonia Josepha Johanna)

2146. This person expressed their appreciation for Cox’s Orange Pippin apples and Wensleydale cheese in the essay In Defence of English Cooking. One book by this author notes that mining households spend only "ten pence a week on green vegetables and ten pence half- penny on milk..., and nothing on fruit." That book by this author was written after studying the working class in Lancashire and Yorkshire. For ten points, name this English author of The Road to Wigan Pier who coined authoritarian psychology terms like "thoughtcrime" and "doublethink" in the novel 1984.
Answer: George Orwell (or Eric Arthur Blair)

2147. This body of water was described by António Galvão as a “dragon’s tail.” Philip Parker King spent five years surveying the area surrounding this body of water, and for thousands of years, indigenous groups, such as the Kawésqar, inhabited this body of water. The Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between two bordering countries recognized this body of water as a demilitarized zone. For ten points, what "Strait" on the southern tip of South America is named for a Portuguese explorer?
Answer: Strait(s) of Magellan (or Estrecho de Magallanes

2148. In reference to this figure, scientist Olesya Turkina said, "We did not learn enough from the mission to justify the death of [this astronaut]." A monument depicts this figure cradled by hands whose digits double as rockets, a part of the larger "Monument to the Conquerors of Space." Scientist Vladimir Yazdovsky trained this cosmonaut to eat a specialized gel and kept her in progressively smaller cages to prep her for spaceflight. The term "Muttnik" was given to, for ten points, what Moscow stray dog, the first animal to orbit earth?
Answer: Laika [[LYE-kah]] (

2149. As the head of Charles University, this man affirmed his nation's neutrality in the Western Schism. This man is credited with developing a dot above a diacritic which later became the háček [[HAH-chek]] for a language he helped to codify in his Orthographia bohemica. While he believed in transubstantiation, this man was heavily influenced by John Wycliffe and was condemned as a heretic at the Council of Constance. For ten points, name this Bohemian theologian who was burned at the stake and names a series of wars with the Holy Roman Empire fought after his death.
Answer: Jan Hus (or John Huss; or John Hus

2150. In a Supreme Court case, this treaty was deemed “useless” by Chief Justice James Pendergast. The similar Batman’s Treaty was signed in a nearby country five years before this treaty, in which over 500 representatives of one side were presented with a non-English version. In addition to working on its central country’s Declaration of Independence, James Busby helped draft this treaty with William Hobson. Negotiated in 1840 in a country containing Mount Cook, for ten points, what was this treaty through which lands were ceded by the Maori?
Answer: Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] (or Te Tiriti o Waitangi)

2151. This campaign was announced with a tweet stating, “We must now realize the promise of America by trusting God, unifying our vision and building our future.” Over 600 petition signatures from this campaign were claimed to be fraudulent due to “nearly identical handwriting and others [lacking] complete addresses.” Michelle Tidball, a preacher from Wyoming, was selected to be the running mate for this campaign's candidate. For ten points, what campaign for the Birthday Party was announced by a Chicago rapper to run for president of the United States?
Answer: Kanye West

2152. In a Dutch town, two members of this organization named Sigismund Best and Richard Stevens were captured during the Venlo Incident after a trap was sprung by Abwehr [[AHB-vehr]] head Walter Schellenberg. This organization plotted, but never executed, a plan to sneak estrogen into Adolf Hitler's food in an effort to feminize him. Author Graham Greene served in this organization under Kim Philby, who later betrayed this organization as a member of the "Cambridge Five" and joined the KGB. For ten points, name this foreign intelligence agency of the United Kingdom.
Answer: MI6 (

2153. In the 1990s, an activist group made up of employees of this company known as Fuerza Unida [[FWEHR-zah oo-NEE-dah]] led a campaign against it for higher pay. A Latvian immigrant, named Jacob Davis, co-founded this company and came up with a patent to utilize copper rivets. Overalls began to be sold by this business in the 1870s, a few decades after its namesake founder originally operated a business on 90 Sacramento Street in a city where miners flocked during the California Gold Rush. Denim is heavily utilized by, for ten points, what company, the first to manufacture blue jeans?
Answer: Levi Strauss & Co. (or Levi’s) BONUS: Before partnering with Levi Strauss, Jacob Davis, the inventor of modern jeans, operated a tailoring business in what "Biggest Little City in the World" in Nevada? Reno, Nevada

2154. Project FUBELT aimed to prevent this man from ascending to power. This man attained his highest office by obtaining a plurality vote over Jorge Alessandri as a candidate for the Popular Unity Coalition. This man appointed general Carlos Prats to the cabinet as his Minister of the Interior. This man gave his last speech while enemy troops were storming the La Moneda Palace and nationalized his country’s copper mines. For ten points, identify this Marxist president of Chile who was succeeded by Augusto Pinochet.
Answer: Salvador Allende [[ah-YEN-deh]] Gossens (or Salvador Guillermo Allende Gossens) BONUS: The CIA opposed Salvador Allende during Operation Condor, which also helped Alfredo Stroessner secure power in what country, where documents of his violent tactics were recorded in the "Archives of Terror"? Republic of Paraguay (or República del Paraguay; or Tetã Paraguái)

2155. It's not Spain, but protests in this country erupted during the 1937 funerals of two supporters of Francisco Franco. The last living recipient of the Order of Victory was a leader of this country, who succeeded a non-Spanish Ferdinand I. During a 1941 massacre, this country was in control of Odessa. Michael I was a king of this country, another of whose leaders feuded with Horia Sima, the head of its Iron Guard. Once led by Ion Antonescu, for ten points, what is this European country governed from Bucharest?
Answer: Romania (

2156. Following a defeat to this city state, Argia searched for the dead body of her husband then unsuccessfully tried to revive him with tears and kisses. The Nemean Games were founded while a group was en route to this city. Adrastus was the leader of the aforementioned group which aimed to restore a brother of Ismene and Antigone [[an-TIG- oh-nee]] to the throne of this city. The “Seven Against [this city]" assisted one side in a conflict between the sons of an exiled king who married his mother. For ten points, name this Greek city-state legendarily ruled by Oedipus.
Answer: Thebes (or Thíva; or Thêbai) BONUS: Which Ancient Greek playwright documented the tragedy of Oedipus and wrote the plays Electra and Ajax? Sophocles

2157. Two members of this family were accompanied by the ambassador Koeketei on a trip in which a paiza was to be bestowed upon the pope. An outpost at Sandak on the Crimean Peninsula was established by the aforementioned brothers from this family whose nephew wrote about Manji in a work sometimes referred to as Il Milione [[ill-mill-YOH-neh]]. That member of this family lived during the 13th century and served in Kublai Khan’s court. For ten points, identify this family that included the Venetian traveler Marco.
Answer: Polo family (

2158. Daniel E. Nijensohn did an analysis of this person’s skull x-rays and suggested that she was given a pre-frontal lobotomy months before her death. Thousands of people were injured when this person’s body was transported to the Ministry of Labour Building. This person’s corpse was found in a crypt in Milan, Italy under the name “María Maggi” after being lost for sixteen years following her husband's overthrow in the Revolución Libertadora. For ten points, name this wildly popular first lady of Argentina during the late 1940s and early 1950s.
Answer: Eva Perón (or María Eva Duarte de Perón; or María Eva Duarte

2159. A replication of one of this psychologist’s experiments used emails to study attitudes towards presidential candidate Ross Perot [[PEH-roh]]. The University of London replicated this psychologist’s experiment on altruism by leaving 300 letters on sidewalks. This psychologist asked, “Could it be that Eichmann and his million accomplices in the Holocaust were just following orders?” in a noted namesake experiment. For ten points, what psychologist tested obedience to authority through the administering of fake electric shocks?
Answer: Stanley Milgram (

2160. William Shockley is often called the "father of [this region]" a result of his attempts to commercialize his transistor design. Frederick Terman is often credited with personally nurturing several firms that developed in this region, like Lockheed Martin and Hewlett- Packard. Made a popular site due to its proximity to Stanford University, for ten points, what is this region in Northern California known for headquartering many pioneering technology corporations?
Answer: Silicon Valley (

2161. President who launched a relief effort with federal funding.
Answer: George H.W. Bush (

2162. Black man whose attack by policeman was caught on camera, leading to a trial which began the riots.
Answer: Rodney King (or Rodney Glen King)

2163. City in a nearby state which experienced looting simultaneous to LA, seven miles from a namesake "Strip."
Answer: Las Vegas (

2164. Asian minority whose "Town" was destroyed due, in part, to the killing of Latasha Harlins.
Answer: Koreans (

2165. 1965 riots named for an LA neighborhood to which the 1992 riots were compared due to their severity.
Answer: Watts Riots

2166. Now-controversial comedian who asked rioters to stop and watch his sitcom's finale instead.
Answer: Bill Cosby (or William Henry Cosby Jr.

2167. First wife, the daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella.
Answer: Catherine of Aragon (

2168. Only daughter he had with Anne Boleyn, known as the "Virgin Queen."
Answer: Elizabeth I (

2169. Third wife who died after giving birth to the king's only son.
Answer: Jane Seymour (

2170. Only son of Henry VIII who appointed Lady Jane Grey as his heir.
Answer: Edward VI [[the Sixth]]

2171. Chief Minister who fell from power after arranging his disastrous marriage with Anne of Cleves.
Answer: Thomas Cromwell (

2172. Lover of Catherine Howard and friend of Henry's whose purported affair led to their executions.
Answer: Thomas Culpeper

2173. "Liberator" of South America who served as the first President of Gran Colombia.
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

2174. Neighboring country which broke off relations following the recognition of opposition leader Juan Guaidó.
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (or República Bolivariana de Venezuela)

2175. Medellín [[meh-deh-YEEN]] cartel leader known as the "King of Cocaine."
Answer: Pablo Escobar (or Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria)

2176. City which is named for a Spanish city founded as a "New Carthage."
Answer: Cartagena (

2177. Marxist insurgent group which agreed to a truce after negotiations with Juan Manuel Santos.
Answer: FARC (

2178. Viceroyalty of the Spanish crown from which it broke away along with its neighbors.
Answer: Viceroyalty of New Granada (or Virreinato de Nueva Granada

2179. A leader of a rebel group in this country, Datu Amil, was killed at the Battle of Bud Bagsak, one of the final battles of a rebellion in which rebels were massacred at Bud Dajo. The Organic Act and Jones (+) Act attempted to formalize a parliament in this occupied country. A president of this country was captured the Battle of Tirad Pass. This country's Moro population was suppressed with assistance from John Pershing. Manuel (*) Quezon became the first president of, for ten points, what country that gained independence in the Treaty of Manila?
Answer: Philippines (

2180. The speaker of this oration notes how “the life of the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands” if a certain result is achieved. This address's speaker warns that “the whole fury and might of the enemy must very soon be turned on (+) us.” In this speech, the orator claims, “We in this Island…will never lose our sense of comradeship” and states that a certain sentiment would hold “if the empire lasts a thousand years.” Given two weeks after its speaker had noted that “we shall (*) fight on the beaches”, for ten points, what was this speech by Winston Churchill about a certain glorious time period?
Answer: “This was their finest hour" speech (

2181. The so-called "Green Count" of Savoy and the late arrival of his five hundred men to this battle may have led to his ally's decisive defeat. The sacred banner known as the oriflamme was abandoned by its bearer at this battle, and the siege of Calais [[cah-LAY]] (+) occurred in the immediate aftermath of this battle. A muddy environment slowed the charge of knights under Phillip VI at this battle, resulting in the English foot infantry and longbowmen quickly routing them. Edward the (*) Black Prince orchestrated, for ten points, which early victory by the English during the Hundred Years' War?
Answer: Battle of Crécy

2182. A U.N. Truth Commission held the Atlacatl [[aht-lah-KAH-tul]] Battalion responsible for a massacre that killed roughly 800 inhabitants in this county’s village of El Mozote. The killing of (+) Rutilio Grande in this country prompted liberation theologian, Archbishop Óscar Romero, to refuse to attend state occasions. A violent 1979 to (*) 1992 civil war was fought in, for the point, what country between Guatemala and Honduras?
Answer: Republic of El Salvador (

2183. In 2004, the Badeschiff [[BAH-deh-shiff]] floating swimming pool was opened on this body of water. At Eisenhüttenstadt [["EYE"-zen-HOO-ten-shtaht]], formerly known as Stalinstadt, this river's Dahme [[DAH-meh]] tributary is linked to the Oder via a canal. One building along this river housed the Volkskammer (+) and was torn down in 2006. That building was the Palace of the Republic which was on this river's Museum Island (*) along with the Bode [[BOH-deh]] Museum. For ten points, name this tributary of the Havel river that runs through Berlin.
Answer: Spree River [[SHPRAY]] (or Sprjewja; or Spréva; be lenient on pronunciation)

2184. A temple to this deity was consecrated by Gaius Duilius after the Battle of Mylae. In Ovid’s Fasti, this deity describes himself as the “janitor of the celestial court.” Numa Pompilius established a temple at the forum that was dedicated to this deity. The (*) rex sacrorum typically offered a ram to this deity during the Agonium festival. The opening and closing of the gates at this deity’s temple symbolized, respectively, (*) wartime or peace. For ten points, who was this double-faced Roman god of beginnings and transitions?
Answer: Janus (or Ianus)

2185. The Guarneri and Rugeri [[roo-GEH-ree]] families were known for manufacturing these objects in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. The (+) "Messiah" is perhaps the most pristine of some 650 surviving examples of these instruments produced by a man who used dark (*) varnish and intricate carvings. For the point, name these string instruments, whose notable creators include Antonio Stradivari.
Answer: Violins (or Fiddle

2186. While Governor of Ujjain, this man married a merchant's daughter named Devi whose lack of royal blood led to her exclusion from the title of agramahisi, or Chief Queen. This ruler maintained a namesake "hell" (+) prison wherein he supposedly had Chandagirika torture people, including possibly having his own brother executed for being a Jain. A Greek ambassador named Dionysius visited the court of Bindusara and this man, who supposedly was overwhelmed by (*) violence he had unleashed in Kalinga. For ten points, name this Buddhist-convert Emperor of the Mauryan dynasty of India.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (

2187. This man is the subject of a biography by Robert Wilson subtitled “An American Life," and this man funded a series of renovation projects in Connecticut that were part of his “profitable philanthropy.” This man once testified against William Mumler, who was considered a “spirit photographer.” This businessman once offered to provide $500 to anyone who could demonstrate the ability to speak with the dead and became known as the prince of the “humbug" hoax. Claiming “a sucker is born every minute," for ten points, who was this businessman who founded a circus with James Anthony Bailey?
Answer: Phineas Taylor Barnum (or P.T. Barnum

2188. This person expressed their appreciation for Cox’s Orange Pippin apples and Wensleydale cheese in the essay In Defence of English Cooking. One book by this author notes that mining households spend only "ten pence a week on green vegetables and ten pence half-penny on milk..., and nothing on fruit." That book by this author was written after studying the working class in Lancashire and Yorkshire. For ten points, name this English author of The Road to Wigan Pier who coined authoritarian psychology terms like "thoughtcrime" and "doublethink" in the novel 1984.
Answer: George Orwell (or Eric Arthur Blair)

2189. This body of water was described by António Galvão as a “dragon’s tail.” Philip Parker King spent five years surveying the area surrounding this body of water, and for thousands of years, indigenous groups, such as the Kawésqar, inhabited this body of water. The Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between two bordering countries recognized this body of water as a demilitarized zone. For ten points, what "Strait" on the southern tip of South America is named for a Portuguese explorer?
Answer: Strait(s) of Magellan (or Estrecho de Magallanes

2190. Carlos Salinas's tenure as president of this company included the arrest of the union boss José Hernández Galicia, who was using violent force to coerce the syndicates of workers. Following the creation of this company, former Secretary of Agriculture Saturnino Cedillo [[seh-DEE-yoh]] declared the sitting government illegitimate and revolted from his power base. Citing Article 27 of the Constitution of 1917, Lázaro Cárdenas ordered the creation of this company after seizing Anglo-Dutch and American holdings. The national oil company of Mexico is, for ten points, what state enterprise created in the 1930s?
Answer: PEMEX (

2191. As the head of Charles University, this man affirmed his nation's neutrality in the Western Schism. This man is credited with developing a dot above a diacritic which later became the háček [[HAH-chek]] for a language he helped to codify in his Orthographia bohemica. While he believed in transubstantiation, this man was heavily influenced by John Wycliffe and was condemned as a heretic at the Council of Constance. For ten points, name this Bohemian theologian who was burned at the stake and names a series of wars with the Holy Roman Empire fought after his death.
Answer: Jan Hus (or John Huss; or John Hus

2192. In a Supreme Court case, this treaty was deemed “useless” by Chief Justice James Pendergast. The similar Batman’s Treaty was signed in a nearby country five years before this treaty, in which over 500 representatives of one side were presented with a non- English version. In addition to working on its central country’s Declaration of Independence, James Busby helped draft this treaty with William Hobson. Negotiated in 1840 in a country containing Mount Cook, for ten points, what was this treaty through which lands were ceded by the Maori?
Answer: Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] (or Te Tiriti o Waitangi)

2193. This campaign was announced with a tweet stating, “We must now realize the promise of America by trusting God, unifying our vision and building our future.” Over 600 petition signatures from this campaign were claimed to be fraudulent due to “nearly identical handwriting and others [lacking] complete addresses.” Michelle Tidball, a preacher from Wyoming, was selected to be the running mate for this campaign's candidate. For ten points, what campaign for the Birthday Party was announced by a Chicago rapper to run for president of the United States?
Answer: Kanye West

2194. In a Dutch town, two members of this organization named Sigismund Best and Richard Stevens were captured during the Venlo Incident after a trap was sprung by Abwehr [[AHB-vehr]] head Walter Schellenberg. This organization plotted, but never executed, a plan to sneak estrogen into Adolf Hitler's food in an effort to feminize him. Author Graham Greene served in this organization under Kim Philby, who later betrayed this organization as a member of the "Cambridge Five" and joined the KGB. For ten points, name this foreign intelligence agency of the United Kingdom.
Answer: MI6 (

2195. The last person to receive this award was Hayley Mills for her performance in the 1960 film Pollyanna. This award was established after Jackie Cooper’s performance in the film Skippy lost to Lionel Barrymore. Bob Hope called this award the “Oscarette” when presenting it to Margaret O’Brien. First won by Shirley Temple in 1934, for ten points, what now-discontinued award recognized child actors and actresses for their performances in film?
Answer: Academy Juvenile Award (

2196. An anachronism in a film about this historical figure involved the appearance of a pair of purple Converse sneakers during a shopping spree. A musical by Michael Kunze and Sylvester Levay parallels the life of this historical figure with a woman named Margrid Arnaud. A 2006 film directed by Sofia Coppola portrayed this figure’s affair with Axel von Fersen. For ten points, what historical figure was the wife of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]] and last queen of France before the French Revolution?
Answer: Marie Antoinette (or Marie Antoinette Josèphe Jeanne; or Maria Antonia Josepha Johanna)

2197. In the 1990s, an activist group made up of employees of this company known as Fuerza Unida [[FWEHR-zah oo-NEE-dah]] led a campaign against it for higher pay. A Latvian immigrant, named Jacob Davis, co-founded this company and came up with a patent to utilize copper rivets. Overalls began to be sold by this business in the 1870s, a few decades after its namesake founder originally operated a business on 90 Sacramento Street in a city where miners flocked during the California Gold Rush. Denim is heavily utilized by, for ten points, what company, the first to manufacture blue jeans?
Answer: Levi Strauss & Co. (or Levi’s) BONUS: Before partnering with Levi Strauss, Jacob Davis, the inventor of modern jeans, operated a tailoring business in what "Biggest Little City in the World" in Nevada? Reno, Nevada

2198. Project FUBELT aimed to prevent this man from ascending to power. This man attained his highest office by obtaining a plurality vote over Jorge Alessandri as a candidate for the Popular Unity Coalition. This man appointed general Carlos Prats to the cabinet as his Minister of the Interior. This man gave his last speech while enemy troops were storming the La Moneda Palace and nationalized his country’s copper mines. For ten points, identify this Marxist president of Chile who was succeeded by Augusto Pinochet.
Answer: Salvador Allende [[ah-YEN-deh]] Gossens (or Salvador Guillermo Allende Gossens) BONUS: The CIA opposed Salvador Allende during Operation Condor, which also helped Alfredo Stroessner secure power in what country, where documents of his violent tactics were recorded in the "Archives of Terror"? Republic of Paraguay (or República del Paraguay; or Tetã Paraguái)

2199. It's not Spain, but protests in this country erupted during the 1937 funerals of two supporters of Francisco Franco. The last living recipient of the Order of Victory was a leader of this country, who succeeded a non-Spanish Ferdinand I. During a 1941 massacre, this country was in control of Odessa. Michael I was a king of this country, another of whose leaders feuded with Horia Sima, the head of its Iron Guard. Once led by Ion Antonescu, for ten points, what is this European country governed from Bucharest?
Answer: Romania (

2200. Following a defeat to this city state, Argia searched for the dead body of her husband then unsuccessfully tried to revive him with tears and kisses. The Nemean Games were founded while a group was en route to this city. Adrastus was the leader of the aforementioned group which aimed to restore a brother of Ismene and Antigone [[an-TIG- oh-nee]] to the throne of this city. The “Seven Against [this city]" assisted one side in a conflict between the sons of an exiled king who married his mother. For ten points, name this Greek city-state legendarily ruled by Oedipus.
Answer: Thebes (or Thíva; or Thêbai) BONUS: Which Ancient Greek playwright documented the tragedy of Oedipus and wrote the plays Electra and Ajax? Sophocles

2201. Two members of this family were accompanied by the ambassador Koeketei on a trip in which a paiza was to be bestowed upon the pope. An outpost at Sandak on the Crimean Peninsula was established by the aforementioned brothers from this family whose nephew wrote about Manji in a work sometimes referred to as Il Milione [[ill-mill-YOH- neh]]. That member of this family lived during the 13th century and served in Kublai Khan’s court. For ten points, identify this family that included the Venetian traveler Marco.
Answer: Polo family (

2202. Daniel E. Nijensohn did an analysis of this person’s skull x-rays and suggested that she was given a pre-frontal lobotomy months before her death. Thousands of people were injured when this person’s body was transported to the Ministry of Labour Building. This person’s corpse was found in a crypt in Milan, Italy under the name “María Maggi” after being lost for sixteen years following her husband's overthrow in the Revolución Libertadora. For ten points, name this wildly popular first lady of Argentina during the late 1940s and early 1950s.
Answer: Eva Perón (or María Eva Duarte de Perón; or María Eva Duarte

2203. A replication of one of this psychologist’s experiments used emails to study attitudes towards presidential candidate Ross Perot [[PEH-roh]]. The University of London replicated this psychologist’s experiment on altruism by leaving 300 letters on sidewalks. This psychologist asked, “Could it be that Eichmann and his million accomplices in the Holocaust were just following orders?” in a noted namesake experiment. For ten points, what psychologist tested obedience to authority through the administering of fake electric shocks?
Answer: Stanley Milgram (

2204. William Shockley is often called the "father of [this region]" a result of his attempts to commercialize his transistor design. Frederick Terman is often credited with personally nurturing several firms that developed in this region, like Lockheed Martin and Hewlett- Packard. Made a popular site due to its proximity to Stanford University, for ten points, what is this region in Northern California known for headquartering many pioneering technology corporations?
Answer: Silicon Valley (

2205. President who launched a relief effort with federal funding.
Answer: George H.W. Bush (

2206. Black man whose attack by policeman was caught on camera, leading to a trial which began the riots.
Answer: Rodney King (or Rodney Glen King)

2207. City in a nearby state which experienced looting simultaneous to LA, seven miles from a namesake "Strip."
Answer: Las Vegas (

2208. Asian minority whose "Town" was destroyed due, in part, to the killing of Latasha Harlins.
Answer: Koreans (

2209. 1965 riots named for an LA neighborhood to which the 1992 riots were compared due to their severity.
Answer: Watts Riots

2210. Now-controversial comedian who asked rioters to stop and watch his sitcom's finale instead.
Answer: Bill Cosby (or William Henry Cosby Jr.

2211. Mayor of LA who was accused of triggering the riots for criticizing the non-guilty brutality verdict.
Answer: Tom Bradley (or Thomas Bradley)

2212. Conservative governor of California at the time of the riots, who requested that the Insurrection Act be invoked.
Answer: Pete Wilson (or Peter Barton Wilson)

2213. First wife, the daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella.
Answer: Catherine of Aragon (

2214. Only daughter he had with Anne Boleyn, known as the "Virgin Queen."
Answer: Elizabeth I (

2215. Third wife who died after giving birth to the king's only son.
Answer: Jane Seymour (

2216. Only son of Henry VIII who appointed Lady Jane Grey as his heir.
Answer: Edward VI [[the Sixth]]

2217. Chief Minister who fell from power after arranging his disastrous marriage with Anne of Cleves.
Answer: Thomas Cromwell (

2218. Lover of Catherine Howard and friend of Henry's whose purported affair led to their executions.
Answer: Thomas Culpeper

2219. Final wife whose book Prayers or Meditations was the first published by an English queen under her own name.
Answer: Catherine Parr (

2220. Son by Henry's first mistress, Elizabeth Blount, who became Lord High Admiral and was considered for the throne before his death.
Answer: Henry FitzRoy (

2221. "Liberator" of South America who served as the first President of Gran Colombia.
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

2222. Neighboring country which broke off relations following the recognition of opposition leader Juan Guaidó.
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (or República Bolivariana de Venezuela)

2223. Medellín [[meh-deh-YEEN]] cartel leader known as the "King of Cocaine."
Answer: Pablo Escobar (or Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria)

2224. City which is named for a Spanish city founded as a "New Carthage."
Answer: Cartagena (

2225. Marxist insurgent group which agreed to a truce after negotiations with Juan Manuel Santos.
Answer: FARC (

2226. Viceroyalty of the Spanish crown from which it broke away along with its neighbors.
Answer: Viceroyalty of New Granada (or Virreinato de Nueva Granada

2227. Period of domestic unrest in the 1950s, sparked by the assassination Jorge Gaitán [["guy"-TAHN]].
Answer: La Violencia (or The Violence)

2228. Late 19th century movement led by Rafael Núñez which aimed to reverse secularization.
Answer: La Regeneración (

2229. A leader of a rebel group in this country, Datu Amil, was killed at the Battle of Bud Bagsak, one of the final battles of a rebellion in which rebels were massacred at Bud Dajo. The Organic Act and Jones (+) Act attempted to formalize a parliament in this occupied country. A president of this country was captured the Battle of Tirad Pass. This country's Moro population was suppressed with assistance from John Pershing. Manuel (*) Quezon became the first president of, for ten points, what country that gained independence in the Treaty of Manila?
Answer: Philippines (

2230. The speaker of this oration notes how “the life of the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands” if a certain result is achieved. This address's speaker warns that “the whole fury and might of the enemy must very soon be turned on (+) us.” In this speech, the orator claims, “We in this Island…will never lose our sense of comradeship” and states that a certain sentiment would hold “if the empire lasts a thousand years.” Given two weeks after its speaker had noted that “we shall (*) fight on the beaches”, for ten points, what was this speech by Winston Churchill about a certain glorious time period?
Answer: “This was their finest hour" speech (

2231. The so-called "Green Count" of Savoy and the late arrival of his five hundred men to this battle may have led to his ally's decisive defeat. The sacred banner known as the oriflamme was abandoned by its bearer at this battle, and the siege of Calais [[cah-LAY]] (+) occurred in the immediate aftermath of this battle. A muddy environment slowed the charge of knights under Phillip VI at this battle, resulting in the English foot infantry and longbowmen quickly routing them. Edward the (*) Black Prince orchestrated, for ten points, which early victory by the English during the Hundred Years' War?
Answer: Battle of Crécy

2232. This building was built on land purchased by the mining magnates Mott and Samuel Newhouse. The term “23 skidoo” is thought to have arisen near this building which originally did not include women’s restrooms. Originally built to serve as an office for the George A. Fuller (+) Company, this Burnham-designed building now lends its name to a district of Manhattan. Found on Fifth Avenue, this building was intended to fill in a (*) wedge-shaped gap at the intersection with Broadway. For ten points, name this New York skyscraper with a distinctive triangular shape.
Answer: Flatiron Building (

2233. In 2004, the Badeschiff [[BAH-deh-shiff]] floating swimming pool was opened on this body of water. At Eisenhüttenstadt [["EYE"-zen-HOO-ten-shtaht]], formerly known as Stalinstadt, this river's Dahme [[DAH-meh]] tributary is linked to the Oder via a canal. One building along this river housed the Volkskammer (+) and was torn down in 2006. That building was the Palace of the Republic which was on this river's Museum Island (*) along with the Bode [[BOH-deh]] Museum. For ten points, name this tributary of the Havel river that runs through Berlin.
Answer: Spree River [[SHPRAY]] (or Sprjewja; or Spréva; be lenient on pronunciation)

2234. A temple to this deity was consecrated by Gaius Duilius after the Battle of Mylae. In Ovid’s Fasti, this deity describes himself as the “janitor of the celestial court.” Numa Pompilius established a temple at the forum that was dedicated to this deity. The (*) rex sacrorum typically offered a ram to this deity during the Agonium festival. The opening and closing of the gates at this deity’s temple symbolized, respectively, (*) wartime or peace. For ten points, who was this double-faced Roman god of beginnings and transitions?
Answer: Janus (or Ianus)

2235. Paracelsus [[pah-rah-SEL-sus]] believed this phenomenon occurred due to "overheated blood," while local burghers attempted to end this craze by clearing the open-air grain market for two weeks. One theory concerning this phenomenon claims German peasants (*) were exposed to the psychoactive ergot [[ER-got]] fungi occasionally found in rye bread. People afflicted with this phenomenon were brought to the grotto of St. Vitus. (*) 16th century Strasbourg was struck with, for ten points, what "Plague" during which people gyrated uncontrollably?
Answer: Dancing Plague (or Dancing Mania

2236. While Governor of Ujjain, this man married a merchant's daughter named Devi whose lack of royal blood led to her exclusion from the title of agramahisi, or Chief Queen. This ruler maintained a namesake "hell" (+) prison wherein he supposedly had Chandagirika torture people, including possibly having his own brother executed for being a Jain. A Greek ambassador named Dionysius visited the court of Bindusara and this man, who supposedly was overwhelmed by (*) violence he had unleashed in Kalinga. For ten points, name this Buddhist-convert Emperor of the Mauryan dynasty of India.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (

2237. Similarities of this speech to Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address have been noted by scholars, as both praise "the uniqueness of the State’s commitment to democracy.” The speaker of this address proclaims, “Thus choosing to die resisting, rather than to live submitting, they fled only from dishonor” when referring to a certain group of people. This speech was recorded by Thucydides in his book History of the Peloponnesian War. For ten points, what "Oration" was spoken by an Athenian politician to honor the soldiers who perished fighting the Spartans?
Answer: Pericles’s Funeral Oration (

2238. A leader with this surname was deposed in Operation Fair Play, a coup led by Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. Following a separatist movement led by Sheikh Mujib, a leader with this surname founded the PPP, or People's Party. A prime minister with this surname was killed in a car bombing in Rawalpindi in 2007. With Indira Gandhi, a prime minister with this surname signed the Shimla Agreement, which established the Line of Control in Kashmir. For ten points, identify this surname shared by Pakistani prime ministers Benazir and Zulfikar Ali.
Answer: Bhutto (

2239. American missionary Daniel Vrooman created a 19th century map of this city which included an accurate depiction of its mercantile ghetto, the Thirteen Factories. Members of a nationalist student organization led by Huang Xing [[ZHING]] were massacred during this city's Yellow Flower Mound Uprising, a part of the larger Xinhai [[ZHIHN-HYE]] Revolution. This city names a "System" instituted by Qing [[CHING]] China which forced all western trade to be concentrated along the Pearl River. Canton is an alternative name for, for ten points, what capital of Guangdong?
Answer: Guangzhou (

2240. In 1665, public celebrations of this observance were banned under the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. Guru Gobind Singh extended this observance for Sikhs, adding a three- day-long festival which traditionally includes martial arts demonstrations. In 2016, Pakistan controversially gave localities the power to declare this festival a public holiday. For ten points, name this Hindu “Festival of Love" that celebrates the arrival of spring and which is often celebrated by people throwing brightly colored powders.
Answer: Holi (

2241. This politician was depicted as the "after" photo in a cover by the Private Eye with the headline, “World’s First Face Transplant A Success.’” This politician was heavily criticized after labeling another party as “fruitcakes, loonies, and closet racists.” The decision for the United Kingdom to opt out of the European Union led to this politician’s resignation in 2016. For ten points, what Conservative politician preceded Theresa May as prime minister of the United Kingdom?
Answer: David Cameron (or David William Donald Cameron)

2242. Eric Nilles and Anil Menon conducted a 2020 study of thousands of employees at this company, revealing that COVID-19 infection rates were lower in those who already contracted the disease. The Technical University of Munich's engineering team won all four iterations of the Hyperloop competition hosted by this company. Amateur astronomer Bill Gray revealed that, in early 2022, the remnants of this company's Falcon 9 were slated to collide with the moon. The colonization of Mars is the end goal held by, for ten points, what extra-terrestrial exploration company founded by Elon Musk?
Answer: SpaceX (or Space Exploration Technologies Corporation)

2243. The writing on the Pashupati seal found at this site has yet to be deciphered. This site's initial excavation was led by Ernest Mackay, who discovered artworks including the soapstone "Priest-King'' statue and the bronze "Dancing Girl" statuette. This site's Great Granary and Great Bath date from the Third millennium BCE, and this site's name means "mound of the dead men'' in Sindhi. For ten points, name this archeological site in present- day Pakistan, a major center of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Answer: Mohenjo-daro (

2244. Signs protesting this event encouraged residents to “buy no milk.” An editorial by the New York Times dubbed this event the “Nightmare in the Catskills.” Governor Nelson Rockefeller, who declared this event a “disaster zone,” considered sending in the National Guard but was dissuaded by this event’s organizer, John P. Roberts. Carlos Santana, the Killers, and Miley Cyrus were scheduled to perform in a failed revival of this event. For ten points, what landmark 1960s musical festival was held in Bethel, New York?
Answer: Woodstock (or Woodstock Music and Art Fair; or Woodstock Rock Festival)

2245. This country's 1948 Civil War was sparked by the assassination of People's Vanguard leader Mora Valverde and the overthrow of Teodoro Picado. Quakers from Alabama who failed to become conscientious objectors moved to this country's town of Monteverde, which contains a cloud forest. This country's president, Jose Figueres Ferrer, abolished the army as a precaution against the militarism seen in other Central American countries. Formerly split between New Granada and New Spain, for ten points, what is this country between Nicaragua and Panama?
Answer: Republic of Costa Rica (or Republica de Costa Rica) BONUS: The League War of Costa Rica occurred while it was member

2246. Following the Battle of Alnwick, this ruler incorporated the counties of Westmoreland and Cumberland at the expense of the Scottish monarch, Malcolm III. Nobleman Walter Tirel was accused of killing this king with an arrow during a hunting trip, an assassination that may have been ordered by this king's sibling, Henry Beauclerc [[boh-KLEHRK]]. For ten points, name this Anglo-Norman king and son of William the Conqueror, nicknamed for his red hair.
Answer: William II (or William Rufus) BONUS: William II and Henry I's mother shared what name with an "empress" who contested the English throne during The Anarchy? Empress Matilda (

2247. Nubian soldiers headquartered near this city’s Thika Road may have been the earliest inhabitants of one of its regions that began as a forest settlement. George Whitehouse originally founded this city that served as a depot during the construction of the Uganda Railway. In 2009, a rehousing scheme that was supported by Raila Odinga aimed to clear slums of this city, such as Kibera. In 1950, the East African Trade Unions Congress held a nine- day general strike in this city. For ten points, name this city shared by the Maasai and Kikuyu, the largest city and capital of Kenya.
Answer: Nairobi (

2248. One politician in this country often ended campaign speeches by stating, “I’m different.” A 62-year-old wife of a former president of this country was the frontrunner and eventual winner of this country’s 2021 general election. That woman, Xiomara Castro, is married to this country's former president, Manuel Zelaya. San Pedro Sula was one of the cities heavily affected by a 1998 Category 5 storm that hit this country, Hurricane Mitch. For ten points, name this Central American country that fought the 1960 Soccer War with neighboring El Salvador.
Answer: Republic of Honduras (

2249. The term “redlegs” referred to impoverished inhabitants of several islands in this body of water. The preacher Paul Bogle led a protest among inhabitants of an island in this body of water during the Morant Bay Rebellion. A Welshman who became lieutenant governor of an island in this body of water was Henry Morgan, who clashed with that island’s maroon population. Sugar plantations were built on islands in this body of water’s Lesser Antilles. For ten points, name this formerly pirate-infested sea containing Puerto Rico and Jamaica.
Answer: Caribbean Sea (

2250. A set of fortifications along a shore named for these people is detailed in the Notitia Dignitatum. These people faced a confederacy of Obotrites led by Drozko at the Battle of Bornhöved. A group of these people who resided in Bayeux served in the army of Clovis I, and a pillar sacred to the pagan religion of these people was destroyed during the Massacre at Verden. Widukind was a leader of, for ten points, what Germanic group who settled England alongside the Angles?
Answer: Saxons (

2251. One product created by this company was named after an inventor, because alleged attempts at “everything else… failed.” That product was the Edison device, which was analyzed in a series of 2015 articles by John Carreyrou. In 2012, Safeway attempted to outfit its stores with products of this company that was founded by a nineteen-year-old who had dropped out of Stanford. SEC fraud charges were levelled against this company’s founder, Elizabeth Holmes, who made exaggerated claims about its blood-testing products. For ten points, identify this healthcare technology company.
Answer: Theranos (

2252. In a triptych named for this concept, the artist painted himself as a grayish figure helping a wounded man to the right of a figure floating above the scene. Figures such as Alekto, Pestilence, and Venus appear in a commentary painting by Peter Paul Rubens titled for the Consequences of [this concept]. In Vasily Vereshchagin's painting titled for The Apotheosis of [this concept], a pile of skulls sits outside the walls of a Central Asian city. For ten points, name this concept, depicted in a 1924 painting by Otto Dix inspired by his experiences in the trenches.
Answer: War (

2253. President who introduced the "New Freedom" domestic agenda and guided the U.S. through World War One.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

2254. Right for which the Alice Paul-led National Women's Party advocated during the First Wave of Feminism.
Answer: Suffrage (

2255. Chicago settlement house co-founded by Jane Addams.
Answer: Hull House

2256. Term for journalists like Ida Tarbell who exposed the excesses of American industry and politics.
Answer: Muckrakers (

2257. Reformist governor of Wisconsin who ran as a Progressive in the Election of 1924.
Answer: Robert La Follette (or Robert Marion "Fighting Bob" La Follette)

2258. Sex educator and eugenicist who popularized the term "birth control."
Answer: Margaret Sanger (or Margaret Higgins Sanger; or Margaret Louise Higgins; or Margaret Sanger Slee)

2259. Slavic state which was invaded by Austria-Hungary after the assassination of Franz Ferdinand.
Answer: Kingdom of Serbia (or Kraljevina Srbija)

2260. Capital of Bosnia & Herzegovina that was the site of "Sniper Alley" and a prolonged siege during the 1990s Balkan War.
Answer: Sarajevo (or Sarajeva)

2261. Technology whose earliest combat use was for scouting was during the First Balkan War.
Answer: Airplanes (or Aeroplane

2262. Muslim majority nation in the Western Balkans that became an Italian protectorate during World War Two.
Answer: Albania (or Shqipëri

2263. Informal nickname for the Balkans in the early 20th century due to its political and military volatility.
Answer: Powder keg of Europe (or Balkan Powder Keg)

2264. King of Greece who led troops in the First Balkan War and was later pressured into exile.
Answer: King Constantine I (

2265. Nation on Hispaniola established by a successful slave revolt in 1804.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (

2266. Andean empire which used unpaid laborers under the mita system to build Machu Picchu.
Answer: Incan Empire (or the Incas

2267. Country where Pedro II's daughter, Isabel, passed the Golden Law, abolishing slavery in 1888.
Answer: Empire of Brazil (or Império do Brasil)

2268. Term for the section of the Triangular Trade through which slaves were brought to the Americas.
Answer: Middle Passage

2269. Early colonial Spanish labor system which enslaved much of the native population of the Americas.
Answer: Encomienda system

2270. Jamaican runaways who, led by Queen Nanny, resisted British assimilation in two namesake wars.
Answer: Maroons (

2271. This person and Thomas Pitt are depicted having a physical altercation in an illustration by James Gillray titled The Caneing in Conduit Street. W. Kaye Lamb published an annotated edition of a manuscript detailing this explorer’s voyages. (+) Puget [[PYOO-jet]] Sound, Mount Rainier, and Mount St. Helens were named by this explorer who departed England with the HMS Chatham and HMS (*) Discovery. For ten points, what British captain led expeditions to explore the Pacific and lends his name to a city in British Columbia?
Answer: George Vancouver

2272. An outlaw named Jack Black wrote a memoir about his experiences as one of these people titled You Can’t Win. These people often drew cats and triangles with hands among a series of crypto-signs used as part of their informal communication system. An ethical code (+) of these people calls on them to take up the least desirable jobs possible in each new town. A willingness to engage in labor was historically seen as a contrast between these people and tramps. (*) For ten points, name these migrant workers stereotypically depicted in media carrying their belongings in a bindle.
Answer: Hobo (

2273. In her first major work, Hannah Arendt claimed that this agreement was “a turning point in history” since it led to the eschewing of historic customs as a “source of law.” This document calls for the creation of a “public force…instituted for the advantage of all” and the (+) sixth of its articles claims that “law is the expression of the general will.” Thomas Jefferson consulted on the initial drafts of this document written by the (*) Marquis de Lafayette. For ten points, name this civil rights document penned during the French Revolution.
Answer: Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen (

2274. Wei Zheng wrote the Book of [this dynasty], which included his own participation in Li Mi's Rebellion. During this dynasty, imperial architect Yuwen Kai [[KYE]] built Daxing [[DAH-SHING]] as an expansion of the Han capital of Xi'an [[ZHE- AHN]]. (+) A period known as "The Southern and Northern Dynasties" was ended after this dynasty's founder, Wen, conquered the Chen Dynasty south of the Yangtze. The (*) Tang Dynasty succeeded, for ten points, what short-lived imperial dynasty which reunited China in the late 6th century?
Answer: Sui Dynasty (or Suí cháo)

2275. This man was criticized for taking an elephant-hunting trip to Botswana paid for by Mohamed Eyad Kayali. This man's mistress, Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Sayn admitted to the press that this man had received millions of dollars in kickbacks from interests building the Haramain (+) high-speed railway. In 2014, this leader was succeeded by his son (*) Felipe after abdicating the throne. Living in self-exile since 2020 due to corrupt business dealings in Saudi Arabia, for ten points, who is this former king of Spain?
Answer: Juan Carlos I (or Juan Carlos Alfonso Víctor María de Borbón y Borbón-Dos Sicilias)

2276. This man once infamously pointed a poker at Karl Popper's face, prompting the latter to describe that as breaking a "moral rule." This thinker negated his own early work, and the entire Vienna Circle School, by developing the concept of "language games" (+) in his second book, Philosophical Investigations. This man never returned to his native Austria following the Anschluss (*) due to his Jewish ancestry. For ten points, name this student of Bertrand Russell, a transformative Analytic philosopher who wrote Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
Answer: Ludwig Wittgenstein (or Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein)

2277. A fugitive named Kerry Dee Ketchum was caught by authorities after posing under the name “Patrick Quin” on one of these programs. A 1994 Robert Redford film portrayed a controversy on one of these programs, which involved Herb Stempel and (*) Charles Van Doren on the show Twenty-One. Another one of these programs hosted a 2011 exhibition match between an IBM supercomputer named Watson and two of the show’s greatest champions, Brad (*) Rutter and Ken Jennings. For ten points, what type of television program includes the shows Wheel of Fortune and Jeopardy!?
Answer: Game shows (

2278. A character with this title who experiences peace during the "Age of Gold" despairs in Egypt over the sudden drowning of his lover. A character known as the "arbiter of elegance" owns a Christian slave girl in a novel set during the reign (+) of a character with this title. Marguerite Yourcenar [[YOR-seh-nar]] wrote a novel titled the "Memoirs" of a person with this title, held by a character who loves the prostitute Calpurnia and hides behind a curtain. (*) Robert Graves wrote a fictional biography of a character with, for ten points, what title held by Nero and Claudius?
Answer: Roman Emperor (or Emperor of Rome

2279. This man formally apologized to Archbishop Christodoulos, the head of the Church of Greece, for offenses committed by Catholics against Orthodox populations during the Fourth Crusade. A Member of the ultra-nationalist Grey Wolves named (+) Mehmet Ali Ağca shot this figure during a procession in St. (*) Peter's Square. The initiative World Youth Day was pioneered by, for ten points, what Polish-born pope who was succeeded by Pope Benedict XVI [[the Sixteenth]]?
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or JPII

2280. Similarities of this speech to Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address have been noted by scholars, as both praise "the uniqueness of the State’s commitment to democracy.” The speaker of this address proclaims, “Thus choosing to die resisting, rather than to live submitting, they fled only from dishonor” when referring to a certain group of people. This speech was recorded by Thucydides in his book History of the Peloponnesian War. For ten points, what "Oration" was spoken by an Athenian politician to honor the soldiers who perished fighting the Spartans?
Answer: Pericles’s Funeral Oration (

2281. A leader with this surname was deposed in Operation Fair Play, a coup led by Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. Following a separatist movement led by Sheikh Mujib, a leader with this surname founded the PPP, or People's Party. A prime minister with this surname was killed in a car bombing in Rawalpindi in 2007. With Indira Gandhi, a prime minister with this surname signed the Shimla Agreement, which established the Line of Control in Kashmir. For ten points, identify this surname shared by Pakistani prime ministers Benazir and Zulfikar Ali.
Answer: Bhutto (

2282. American missionary Daniel Vrooman created a 19th century map of this city which included an accurate depiction of its mercantile ghetto, the Thirteen Factories. Members of a nationalist student organization led by Huang Xing [[ZHING]] were massacred during this city's Yellow Flower Mound Uprising, a part of the larger Xinhai [[ZHIHN-HYE]] Revolution. This city names a "System" instituted by Qing [[CHING]] China which forced all western trade to be concentrated along the Pearl River. Canton is an alternative name for, for ten points, what capital of Guangdong?
Answer: Guangzhou (

2283. In 1665, public celebrations of this observance were banned under the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. Guru Gobind Singh extended this observance for Sikhs, adding a three- day-long festival which traditionally includes martial arts demonstrations. In 2016, Pakistan controversially gave localities the power to declare this festival a public holiday. For ten points, name this Hindu “Festival of Love" that celebrates the arrival of spring and which is often celebrated by people throwing brightly colored powders.
Answer: Holi (

2284. This politician was depicted as the "after" photo in a cover by the Private Eye with the headline, “World’s First Face Transplant A Success.’” This politician was heavily criticized after labeling another party as “fruitcakes, loonies, and closet racists.” The decision for the United Kingdom to opt out of the European Union led to this politician’s resignation in 2016. For ten points, what Conservative politician preceded Theresa May as prime minister of the United Kingdom?
Answer: David Cameron (or David William Donald Cameron)

2285. This man deployed diplomat Afanasiy Pushkin to negotiate an "Eternal Peace" with the delegates of Charles IX [[the ninth]]. Dionysus the Grammarian attempted to unseat this man from power by convincing one ruler to divorce this counselor's sister, Irina. This man, Feodor Nikitich Romanov, and Vasili Shuiski served on the advisory council which effectively ran the nation for the son of Ivan the Terrible, Feodor I. The Time of Troubles began following the death of, for ten points, which non-Rurikid tsar?
Answer: Boris Godunov (or Borís Fyodorovich Godunóv

2286. The writing on the Pashupati seal found at this site has yet to be deciphered. This site's initial excavation was led by Ernest Mackay, who discovered artworks including the soapstone "Priest-King'' statue and the bronze "Dancing Girl" statuette. This site's Great Granary and Great Bath date from the Third millennium BCE, and this site's name means "mound of the dead men'' in Sindhi. For ten points, name this archeological site in present- day Pakistan, a major center of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Answer: Mohenjo-daro (

2287. Signs protesting this event encouraged residents to “buy no milk.” An editorial by the New York Times dubbed this event the “Nightmare in the Catskills.” Governor Nelson Rockefeller, who declared this event a “disaster zone,” considered sending in the National Guard but was dissuaded by this event’s organizer, John P. Roberts. Carlos Santana, the Killers, and Miley Cyrus were scheduled to perform in a failed revival of this event. For ten points, what landmark 1960s musical festival was held in Bethel, New York?
Answer: Woodstock (or Woodstock Music and Art Fair; or Woodstock Rock Festival)

2288. This man, who founded and led the National Union of Mineworkers in the 1980s, was implicated in the violent Marikana massacre against striking miners. This Soweto-born politician lost a 1997 presidential election to fellow party member Thabo Mbeki [[mm-BEH- kee]]. In July 2021, this politician deployed the National Guard to the states of Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal after the arrest of his predecessor, Jacob Zuma, caused riots and looting. For ten points, name this ANC politician and president of South Africa.
Answer: Cyril Ramaphosa (or Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa)

2289. Eric Nilles and Anil Menon conducted a 2020 study of thousands of employees at this company, revealing that COVID-19 infection rates were lower in those who already contracted the disease. The Technical University of Munich's engineering team won all four iterations of the Hyperloop competition hosted by this company. Amateur astronomer Bill Gray revealed that, in early 2022, the remnants of this company's Falcon 9 were slated to collide with the moon. The colonization of Mars is the end goal held by, for ten points, what extra-terrestrial exploration company founded by Elon Musk?
Answer: SpaceX (or Space Exploration Technologies Corporation)

2290. This country's 1948 Civil War was sparked by the assassination of People's Vanguard leader Mora Valverde and the overthrow of Teodoro Picado. Quakers from Alabama who failed to become conscientious objectors moved to this country's town of Monteverde, which contains a cloud forest. This country's president, Jose Figueres Ferrer, abolished the army as a precaution against the militarism seen in other Central American countries. Formerly split between New Granada and New Spain, for ten points, what is this country between Nicaragua and Panama?
Answer: Republic of Costa Rica (or Republica de Costa Rica) BONUS: The League War of Costa Rica occurred while it was member

2291. Following the Battle of Alnwick, this ruler incorporated the counties of Westmoreland and Cumberland at the expense of the Scottish monarch, Malcolm III. Nobleman Walter Tirel was accused of killing this king with an arrow during a hunting trip, an assassination that may have been ordered by this king's sibling, Henry Beauclerc [[boh- KLEHRK]]. For ten points, name this Anglo-Norman king and son of William the Conqueror, nicknamed for his red hair.
Answer: William II (or William Rufus) BONUS: William II and Henry I's mother shared what name with an "empress" who contested the English throne during The Anarchy? Empress Matilda (

2292. Nubian soldiers headquartered near this city’s Thika Road may have been the earliest inhabitants of one of its regions that began as a forest settlement. George Whitehouse originally founded this city that served as a depot during the construction of the Uganda Railway. In 2009, a rehousing scheme that was supported by Raila Odinga aimed to clear slums of this city, such as Kibera. In 1950, the East African Trade Unions Congress held a nine-day general strike in this city. For ten points, name this city shared by the Maasai and Kikuyu, the largest city and capital of Kenya.
Answer: Nairobi (

2293. One politician in this country often ended campaign speeches by stating, “I’m different.” A 62-year-old wife of a former president of this country was the frontrunner and eventual winner of this country’s 2021 general election. That woman, Xiomara Castro, is married to this country's former president, Manuel Zelaya. San Pedro Sula was one of the cities heavily affected by a 1998 Category 5 storm that hit this country, Hurricane Mitch. For ten points, name this Central American country that fought the 1960 Soccer War with neighboring El Salvador.
Answer: Republic of Honduras (

2294. The term “redlegs” referred to impoverished inhabitants of several islands in this body of water. The preacher Paul Bogle led a protest among inhabitants of an island in this body of water during the Morant Bay Rebellion. A Welshman who became lieutenant governor of an island in this body of water was Henry Morgan, who clashed with that island’s maroon population. Sugar plantations were built on islands in this body of water’s Lesser Antilles. For ten points, name this formerly pirate-infested sea containing Puerto Rico and Jamaica.
Answer: Caribbean Sea (

2295. A set of fortifications along a shore named for these people is detailed in the Notitia Dignitatum. These people faced a confederacy of Obotrites led by Drozko at the Battle of Bornhöved. A group of these people who resided in Bayeux served in the army of Clovis I, and a pillar sacred to the pagan religion of these people was destroyed during the Massacre at Verden. Widukind was a leader of, for ten points, what Germanic group who settled England alongside the Angles?
Answer: Saxons (

2296. One product created by this company was named after an inventor, because alleged attempts at “everything else… failed.” That product was the Edison device, which was analyzed in a series of 2015 articles by John Carreyrou. In 2012, Safeway attempted to outfit its stores with products of this company that was founded by a nineteen-year-old who had dropped out of Stanford. SEC fraud charges were levelled against this company’s founder, Elizabeth Holmes, who made exaggerated claims about its blood-testing products. For ten points, identify this healthcare technology company.
Answer: Theranos (

2297. In a triptych named for this concept, the artist painted himself as a grayish figure helping a wounded man to the right of a figure floating above the scene. Figures such as Alekto, Pestilence, and Venus appear in a commentary painting by Peter Paul Rubens titled for the Consequences of [this concept]. In Vasily Vereshchagin's painting titled for The Apotheosis of [this concept], a pile of skulls sits outside the walls of a Central Asian city. For ten points, name this concept, depicted in a 1924 painting by Otto Dix inspired by his experiences in the trenches.
Answer: War (

2298. President who introduced the "New Freedom" domestic agenda and guided the U.S. through World War One.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

2299. Right for which the Alice Paul-led National Women's Party advocated during the First Wave of Feminism.
Answer: Suffrage (

2300. Chicago settlement house co-founded by Jane Addams.
Answer: Hull House

2301. Term for journalists like Ida Tarbell who exposed the excesses of American industry and politics.
Answer: Muckrakers (

2302. Reformist governor of Wisconsin who ran as a Progressive in the Election of 1924.
Answer: Robert La Follette (or Robert Marion "Fighting Bob" La Follette)

2303. Sex educator and eugenicist who popularized the term "birth control."
Answer: Margaret Sanger (or Margaret Higgins Sanger; or Margaret Louise Higgins; or Margaret Sanger Slee)

2304. Former vice president who ran as a Progressive in 1948 but only garnered two percent of the national vote.
Answer: Henry A(gard) Wallace

2305. Governor and longtime senator from California who was a vocal opponent of the League of Nations.
Answer: Hiram Johnson (or Hiram Warren Johnson

2306. Slavic state which was invaded by Austria-Hungary after the assassination of Franz Ferdinand.
Answer: Kingdom of Serbia (or Kraljevina Srbija)

2307. Capital of Bosnia & Herzegovina that was the site of "Sniper Alley" and a prolonged siege during the 1990s Balkan War.
Answer: Sarajevo (or Sarajeva)

2308. Technology whose earliest combat use was for scouting was during the First Balkan War.
Answer: Airplanes (or Aeroplane

2309. Muslim majority nation in the Western Balkans that became an Italian protectorate during World War Two.
Answer: Albania (or Shqipëri

2310. Informal nickname for the Balkans in the early 20th century due to its political and military volatility.
Answer: Powder keg of Europe (or Balkan Powder Keg)

2311. King of Greece who led troops in the First Balkan War and was later pressured into exile.
Answer: King Constantine I (

2312. Term used for the Ottoman government that refers to the gate of the Topkapi Palace, which suffered a "raid" during the First Balkan War.
Answer: Sublime Porte (

2313. Leader of the Army of Republica Srpska who was found guilty of genocide for organizing the Srebrenica [sre-brih-NEET-suh]] Massacre.
Answer: Ratko Mladić [[MLAH-dich]]

2314. Nation on Hispaniola established by a successful slave revolt in 1804.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (

2315. Andean empire which used unpaid laborers under the mita system to build Machu Picchu.
Answer: Incan Empire (or the Incas

2316. Country where Pedro II's daughter, Isabel, passed the Golden Law, abolishing slavery in 1888.
Answer: Empire of Brazil (or Império do Brasil)

2317. Term for the section of the Triangular Trade through which slaves were brought to the Americas.
Answer: Middle Passage

2318. Early colonial Spanish labor system which enslaved much of the native population of the Americas.
Answer: Encomienda system

2319. Jamaican runaways who, led by Queen Nanny, resisted British assimilation in two namesake wars.
Answer: Maroons (

2320. Ceremonial wars fought by the Aztecs to capture slaves for both labor and sacrifice.
Answer: Flower Wars (or Flowery Wars

2321. Medieval and Early Modern term for fortress-ports where slaves from the interior were held before being shipped overseas.
Answer: Factory (or Port Factory

2322. This person and Thomas Pitt are depicted having a physical altercation in an illustration by James Gillray titled The Caneing in Conduit Street. W. Kaye Lamb published an annotated edition of a manuscript detailing this explorer’s voyages. (+) Puget [[PYOO-jet]] Sound, Mount Rainier, and Mount St. Helens were named by this explorer who departed England with the HMS Chatham and HMS (*) Discovery. For ten points, what British captain led expeditions to explore the Pacific and lends his name to a city in British Columbia?
Answer: George Vancouver

2323. An outlaw named Jack Black wrote a memoir about his experiences as one of these people titled You Can’t Win. These people often drew cats and triangles with hands among a series of crypto-signs used as part of their informal communication system. An ethical code (+) of these people calls on them to take up the least desirable jobs possible in each new town. A willingness to engage in labor was historically seen as a contrast between these people and tramps. (*) For ten points, name these migrant workers stereotypically depicted in media carrying their belongings in a bindle.
Answer: Hobo (

2324. In her first major work, Hannah Arendt claimed that this agreement was “a turning point in history” since it led to the eschewing of historic customs as a “source of law.” This document calls for the creation of a “public force…instituted for the advantage of all” and the (+) sixth of its articles claims that “law is the expression of the general will.” Thomas Jefferson consulted on the initial drafts of this document written by the (*) Marquis de Lafayette. For ten points, name this civil rights document penned during the French Revolution.
Answer: Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen (

2325. Wei Zheng wrote the Book of [this dynasty], which included his own participation in Li Mi's Rebellion. During this dynasty, imperial architect Yuwen Kai [[KYE]] built Daxing [[DAH-SHING]] as an expansion of the Han capital of Xi'an [[ZHE- AHN]]. (+) A period known as "The Southern and Northern Dynasties" was ended after this dynasty's founder, Wen, conquered the Chen Dynasty south of the Yangtze. The (*) Tang Dynasty succeeded, for ten points, what short-lived imperial dynasty which reunited China in the late 6th century?
Answer: Sui Dynasty (or Suí cháo)

2326. This man was criticized for taking an elephant-hunting trip to Botswana paid for by Mohamed Eyad Kayali. This man's mistress, Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Sayn admitted to the press that this man had received millions of dollars in kickbacks from interests building the Haramain (+) high-speed railway. In 2014, this leader was succeeded by his son (*) Felipe after abdicating the throne. Living in self-exile since 2020 due to corrupt business dealings in Saudi Arabia, for ten points, who is this former king of Spain?
Answer: Juan Carlos I (or Juan Carlos Alfonso Víctor María de Borbón y Borbón-Dos Sicilias)

2327. This man once infamously pointed a poker at Karl Popper's face, prompting the latter to describe that as breaking a "moral rule." This thinker negated his own early work, and the entire Vienna Circle School, by developing the concept of "language games" (+) in his second book, Philosophical Investigations. This man never returned to his native Austria following the Anschluss (*) due to his Jewish ancestry. For ten points, name this student of Bertrand Russell, a transformative Analytic philosopher who wrote Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
Answer: Ludwig Wittgenstein (or Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein)

2328. A fugitive named Kerry Dee Ketchum was caught by authorities after posing under the name “Patrick Quin” on one of these programs. A 1994 Robert Redford film portrayed a controversy on one of these programs, which involved Herb Stempel and (*) Charles Van Doren on the show Twenty-One. Another one of these programs hosted a 2011 exhibition match between an IBM supercomputer named Watson and two of the show’s greatest champions, Brad (*) Rutter and Ken Jennings. For ten points, what type of television program includes the shows Wheel of Fortune and Jeopardy!?
Answer: Game shows (

2329. A character with this title who experiences peace during the "Age of Gold" despairs in Egypt over the sudden drowning of his lover. A character known as the "arbiter of elegance" owns a Christian slave girl in a novel set during the reign (+) of a character with this title. Marguerite Yourcenar [[YOR-seh-nar]] wrote a novel titled the "Memoirs" of a person with this title, held by a character who loves the prostitute Calpurnia and hides behind a curtain. (*) Robert Graves wrote a fictional biography of a character with, for ten points, what title held by Nero and Claudius?
Answer: Roman Emperor (or Emperor of Rome

2330. This man formally apologized to Archbishop Christodoulos, the head of the Church of Greece, for offenses committed by Catholics against Orthodox populations during the Fourth Crusade. A Member of the ultra-nationalist Grey Wolves named (+) Mehmet Ali Ağca shot this figure during a procession in St. (*) Peter's Square. The initiative World Youth Day was pioneered by, for ten points, what Polish-born pope who was succeeded by Pope Benedict XVI [[the Sixteenth]]?
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or JPII

2331. This country’s parliament recently held an underwater session to call attention to global warming, which threatens its population living on low-­‐lying islands. This country’s population primarily speaks a language related to Sinhalese, spoken on Sri Lanka to its northeast. For ten points, name this Indian Ocean island nation that has become popular among honeymooning couples for its resorts featuring romantic bungalows that have been built over the water.
Answer: Maldives

2332. Parson Brownlow was a vocal opponent of joining this group, using his Knoxville Whig newspaper to oppose it. Cotton imports from India and Egypt allowed the United Kingdom to refuse to recognize this group, which employed A. P. Hill and George Pickett in its armed forces. Alexander Hamilton Stephens served as vice-­‐president of, for ten points, what unrecognized nation whose only president, Jefferson Davis, lived in Richmond, Virginia?
Answer: Confederate

2333. An early metal version of these objects was called the pot-­‐de-­‐fer, and culverins were portable types of these items. The Hungarian engineer Orban designed a massive one of these objects that malfunctioned and killed him. Vauban designed star forts to defend against these weapons, which Mehmed II used to destroy the walls of Constantinople in 1453. For ten points, name these gunpowder-­‐ based artillery pieces.
Answer: cannons (or bombards

2334. This country’s prominent businesswomen include Lubna Olayan, who gave a historic address in 2004 at the Jeddah Economic Forum. This country was the target of an incoming missile in 2017 that was fired by rebels in Yemen to its south. For ten points, name this country where, in 2017, King Salman lifted a restriction on driver’s licenses that will, eventually, allow women to drive in Riyadh and Mecca.
Answer: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

2335. This man noted “You and I have a rendezvous with destiny” in his “Time for Choosing” speech. This man’s debating tactics included repeating “There you go again” and ironically refusing to attack his 66-­‐ year-­‐old opponent’s “youth and inexperience.” The “Morning in America” ad supported, for ten points, what former Screen Actors Guild leader who served as US president in the 1980s?
Answer: Ronald (Wilson) Reagan Page 1

2336. In 2010, nine activists trying to bring aid to this territory were killed when their “Freedom Flotilla” was raided. This region’s southwest border lies on the narrow Philadelphia Corridor, which is patrolled by an Egyptian Border Guard Force. In 2005, all Israeli settlements in this region were vacated, as were four in the West Bank. For ten points, name this self-­‐governing Palestinian territory, a strip along the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Gaza Strip (

2337. These people built elaborate catacombs to bury their dead and were blamed for a Great Fire by Nero. As a prelude to gladiatorial competitions, people in this religious group were forced to fight animals in the arena. For ten points, name this religious group of people who were persecuted in the Roman Empire for their worship of Jesus.
Answer: Roman Christians (

2338. Two answers required. Maximilian I was installed by one of these countries on the throne of the other. Ignacio Zaragoza led one of these two countries in victory against the other at the Battle of Puebla, which is commemorated by Cinco de Mayo. For ten points, name these two countries, one in Europe and one in North America, that clashed under leaders like Porfirio Diaz and Napoleon III.
Answer: Mexico and France (

2339. A joint project between the US and New Zealand called Project Seal attempted to design a bomb mimicking the effects of one of these events. An event of this type on Boxing Day devastated the Andaman Islands and Phuket in 2004. That disaster of this type began near Aceh province in the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name these disasters that are triggered by underwater earthquakes.
Answer: tsunamis (

2340. During this man's reign, a disagreement at chariot races grew into the Nika Riots, which he put down at the encouragement of his wife Theodora. This ruler’s general Belisarius recaptured Northern Africa and much of Italy, and this man codified Roman law into the Corpus Juris Civilis. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who built the Hagia Sophia.
Answer: Justinian the Great (or Justinian I) Page 2

2341. In this city, 38 people allegedly watched Winston Moseley murder Kitty Genovese, a crime that inspired study of the bystander effect. In 1989, Matias Reyes committed a crime in this city but only confessed in 2002, well after full-­‐page ads demanding the death penalty were made by Donald Trump. The Son of Sam murdered people during the summer of 1976 in, for ten points, what city whose police wrongly caught the Central Park Five?
Answer: New York City (or NYC) BONUS: Kitty Genovese was murdered in this borough of New York City, home to both JFK and LaGuardia airports. It’s the second most populous borough, after Brooklyn. Queens

2342. During this Prime Minister’s tenure, The Sun ran an infamous headline declaring “Gotcha!” after a submarine controversially sunk the enemy ship General Belgrano in international waters. The IRA attempted to assassinate this Conservative leader in the Brighton Hotel Bombing. John Major succeeded, for ten points, what “Iron Lady” who led through the 1980s as the UK’s first female Prime Minister?
Answer: Margaret Hilda Thatcher BONUS: The General Belgrano was sunk during a

2343. This country was supposedly first settled by Irish monks though more extensive settlement began around the year 800 AD. Volcanic eruptions on this island have led to disruptions in transatlantic air travel in recent years. For ten points, name this country whose largest airport, found in the city of Keflavik, is named after Viking explorer Leif Ericsson.
Answer: Iceland BONUS: Iceland’s highly successful football team won a playoff game at the

2344. The planners of this event were caught after a gunfight at Holbeche House. This event was thwarted after a letter was sent to Lord Monteagle warning him to stay home. This event was planned by Robert Catesby and is commemorated on November 5. For ten points, name this 1605 plot to detonate the houses of Parliament that Guy Fawkes was unable to carry out.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot BONUS: The Gunpowder Plot was an attempt by a group of Catholics to kill this English king. James I of England (

2345. The Forsmark station was able to detect this event over 1000 kilometers away. The Red Forest was formed after this event; it is now found in an “Exclusion Zone.” An iron sarcophagus was built to mitigate the effects of this event, which helped prompt the policy of “glasnost” and rendered Pripyat uninhabitable. For ten points, name this 1986 nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union.
Answer: Chernobyl accident (

2346. After this king’s finance minister liberalized grain commerce, the ensuing grain hoarding triggered revolts known as the Flour War; this king then dismissed that minister, Turgot [tur-­‐goh], in favor of Jacques Necker. This king, who sent the Comte de Rochambeau to aid the American Revolution, was caught fleeing to Varennes with his wife, Marie Antoinette. For ten points, name this French king who was executed during the French Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16th] BONUS: Louis XVI was executed shortly before the Reign of Terror, which was orchestrated by this leader of the Committee of Public Safety. Maximilien Robespierre Page 4

2347. One of these systems was invented in the 15th century by Sejong the Great of the Joseon Dynasty; its 40 elements can be combined into over 11 thousand blocks. The oldest of these systems is an abjad with 22 entries; that Phoenician system inspired modern examples such as Greek, Cyrillic, and Latin. The first two entries in the Hebrew system inspires the name of, for ten points, what term for a set of letters used to write a language?
Answer: alphabet (

2348. This man forced the Nauvoo Expositor to shut down by destroying its press, leading to his death in Carthage Jail while awaiting trial. This man claimed to have received golden plates from the angel Moroni, as well as two seer stones, near the Sacred Grove in western New York. For ten points, name this American religious leader and founder of Mormonism.
Answer: Joseph Smith BONUS: Today, this western US

2349. Oldest American university, which merged with Radcliffe in the 20th century.
Answer: Harvard University (

2350. Connecticut Ivy League school whose secret societies include Skull and Bones.
Answer: Yale University (

2351. Oldest English university, whose 11th century origins make it older than rival Cambridge.
Answer: University of Oxford (or Oxford University)

2352. Part of the United Kingdom home to the University of St. Andrews where Prince William studied.
Answer: Scotland

2353. City whose University split into 13 separate schools after May 1968 riots, some of which are merging into the new Sorbonne University.
Answer: Paris

2354. Northern European country whose oldest university was founded in Uppsala in 1477.
Answer: Sweden

2355. City with the oldest university in Europe, located between Florence and Milan in North Central Italy
Answer: Bologna

2356. Second oldest US college, having been chartered by its royal namesakes.
Answer: The College of William and Mary in Virginia Page 6

2357. Large sea crossed by migrants fleeing Africa to Europe. Its ancient Roman name, Mare Nostrum, names a 2014 rescue operation.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea

2358. Group of 28 European nations that has debated how to handle the refugee crisis.
Answer: European Union (or EU)

2359. Middle Eastern country where civil war against Bashar al-­‐Assad has displaced the most refugees.
Answer: Syria

2360. German chancellor who was both praised and criticized for her response to the refugee crisis.
Answer: Angela Merkel

2361. River for much of Serbia and Croatia’s border which has been a challenge for refugees to cross
Answer: Danube River

2362. Greek island, home of the ancient poet Sappho, to which Turkish refugees often cross.
Answer: Lesbos

2363. Country where Prime Minister Viktor Orban built a wire fence along the Serbian border.
Answer: Hungary

2364. French coastal city on the English Channel where a large camp housed refugees until October 2016.
Answer: Calais [ca-­‐lay] Page 7

2365. War that inspired its creation and which the League of Nations failed to stop.
Answer: World War II

2366. Home country of current Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who previously worked as Prime Minister in Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal

2367. Term for the 15-­‐nation UN body in charge of international peace. Its five permanent members hold veto power.
Answer: UN Security Council (

2368. Home country of Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second Secretary General from Scandinavia.
Answer: Sweden

2369. South Korean Secretary General who left the office in 2016.
Answer: Ban Ki-­‐moon

2370. Dutch city where the Peace Palace hosts the UN’s International Court of Justice.
Answer: the Hague

2371. Secretary General from Ghana who later tried to create peace in Syria.
Answer: Kofi Annan

2372. Former Venezuelan leader who criticized George W. Bush in a speech at the UN.
Answer: Hugo Chavez Fourth Quarter Page 8

2373. The Battle of Montgisard was won by a king of this city who suffered from leprosy and was one of many rulers named Baldwin. A treaty (+) that allowed pilgrims to travel to this city ended a conflict between Saladin and Richard I over this city. (*) For ten points, name this holy city that the Crusades aimed to recapture.
Answer: Jerusalem

2374. Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll worked to develop types of these devices based on the scattering of (+) electrons. In the 17th century, Anton Van Leeuwenhoek built one of these devices to observe what he called animalcules, organisms that Robert (*) Hooke later noted were made up of cells. For ten points, name these scientific tools that allow you to see very small things.
Answer: microscope

2375. In what is now this US state, mistakes in the 1789 Treaty of Paris led to the Aroostook War. In 1820, after the Missouri (+) Compromise, this state was created by splitting off from Massachusetts. This northeastern state’s capital moved in 1832 from Portland to (*) Augusta. For ten points, name this US state that names the battleship sunk in Havana Harbor, triggering the Spanish-­‐ American War.
Answer: Maine (

2376. One of these structures had its outer layer of tura limestone appropriated for nearby construction projects, leading it to be nicknamed after its red color. The first of these structures was constructed at Saqqara and consisted of six (+) mastabas of differing sizes. A bent example of these structures was constructed on the orders of Sneferu. The only (*) remaining example of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World is an example of, for ten points, what massive Egyptian structures that cover royal tombs?
Answer: pyramids (

2377. Prince Johnson videotaped the torture of this country’s President Samuel Doe. Two women from this country and one from Yemen shared the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize; one of those women, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, opposed warlord Charles (+) Taylor, who was convicted of crimes against humanity for this country’s 20th century civil wars. (*) For ten points, name this African country whose capital, Monrovia, was founded by the American Colonization Society as a home for freed slaves.
Answer: Republic of Liberia Page 9

2378. A group of these people led by Fritigern slaughtered the Romans and killed Emperor Valens in the Battle of Adrianople. This ethnic group’s 3rd century AD appearance on the (+) frontiers of Europe hastened the fall of Rome. Alaric and Theodoric were among the leaders (*) of, for ten points, what Germanic ethnic group that was split into western and eastern branches prefixed by “Visi-­‐” and “Ostro-­‐?”
Answer: Goths (

2379. This leader’s namesake “thaw” involved the undoing of his predecessor’s cult of personality, which he attacked in the “Secret Speech” in 1956. This man’s Virgin Lands Campaign attempted to promote agriculture in (+) Kazakhstan. Leonid Brezhnev succeeded, (*) for ten points, what successor of Joseph Stalin as leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Nikita Khrushchev

2380. William Turner’s failure to zigzag may have led to this event, which took place off the Old Head of Kinsale and involved a disputed number of torpedoes. (+) An Imperial German Embassy warning appeared in ads prior to, (*) for ten points, what 1915 event in which a Cunard liner was sunk by a German U-­‐boat, killing over 100 Americans and pushing the US into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania

2381. This country’s navy was attacked by its own ally at Mers-­‐el-­‐Kebir and forced to scuttle its own ships at (+) Toulon. This country built a defensive structure called the Maginot Line that was bypassed by a (*) blitzkrieg through the Ardennes forest. For ten points, name this country that was split into German-­‐occupied north and Vichy south after its defeat in World War II.
Answer: France BONUS: During World War II, Vidkun Quisling led a collaborationist regime in what country, whose people now use “Quisling” as a synonym for traitor? Norway Page 10

2382. This country’s parliament recently held an underwater session to call attention to global warming, which threatens its population living on low-­‐lying islands. This country’s population primarily speaks a language related to Sinhalese, spoken on Sri Lanka to its northeast. For ten points, name this Indian Ocean island nation that has become popular among honeymooning couples for its resorts featuring romantic bungalows that have been built over the water.
Answer: Maldives

2383. Parson Brownlow was a vocal opponent of joining this group, using his Knoxville Whig newspaper to oppose it. Cotton imports from India and Egypt allowed the United Kingdom to refuse to recognize this group, which employed A. P. Hill and George Pickett in its armed forces. Alexander Hamilton Stephens served as vice-­‐president of, for ten points, what unrecognized nation whose only president, Jefferson Davis, lived in Richmond, Virginia?
Answer: Confederate

2384. An early metal version of these objects was called the pot-­‐de-­‐fer, and culverins were portable types of these items. The Hungarian engineer Orban designed a massive one of these objects that malfunctioned and killed him. Vauban designed star forts to defend against these weapons, which Mehmed II used to destroy the walls of Constantinople in 1453. For ten points, name these gunpowder-­‐ based artillery pieces.
Answer: cannons (or bombards

2385. This country’s prominent businesswomen include Lubna Olayan, who gave a historic address in 2004 at the Jeddah Economic Forum. This country was the target of an incoming missile in 2017 that was fired by rebels in Yemen to its south. For ten points, name this country where, in 2017, King Salman lifted a restriction on driver’s licenses that will, eventually, allow women to drive in Riyadh and Mecca.
Answer: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

2386. This man noted “You and I have a rendezvous with destiny” in his “Time for Choosing” speech. This man’s debating tactics included repeating “There you go again” and ironically refusing to attack his 66-­‐ year-­‐old opponent’s “youth and inexperience.” The “Morning in America” ad supported, for ten points, what former Screen Actors Guild leader who served as US president in the 1980s?
Answer: Ronald (Wilson) Reagan Page 1

2387. In 2010, nine activists trying to bring aid to this territory were killed when their “Freedom Flotilla” was raided. This region’s southwest border lies on the narrow Philadelphia Corridor, which is patrolled by an Egyptian Border Guard Force. In 2005, all Israeli settlements in this region were vacated, as were four in the West Bank. For ten points, name this self-­‐governing Palestinian territory, a strip along the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Gaza Strip (

2388. These people built elaborate catacombs to bury their dead and were blamed for a Great Fire by Nero. As a prelude to gladiatorial competitions, people in this religious group were forced to fight animals in the arena. For ten points, name this religious group of people who were persecuted in the Roman Empire for their worship of Jesus.
Answer: Roman Christians (

2389. Two answers required. Maximilian I was installed by one of these countries on the throne of the other. Ignacio Zaragoza led one of these two countries in victory against the other at the Battle of Puebla, which is commemorated by Cinco de Mayo. For ten points, name these two countries, one in Europe and one in North America, that clashed under leaders like Porfirio Diaz and Napoleon III.
Answer: Mexico and France (

2390. A joint project between the US and New Zealand called Project Seal attempted to design a bomb mimicking the effects of one of these events. An event of this type on Boxing Day devastated the Andaman Islands and Phuket in 2004. That disaster of this type began near Aceh province in the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name these disasters that are triggered by underwater earthquakes.
Answer: tsunamis (

2391. During this man's reign, a disagreement at chariot races grew into the Nika Riots, which he put down at the encouragement of his wife Theodora. This ruler’s general Belisarius recaptured Northern Africa and much of Italy, and this man codified Roman law into the Corpus Juris Civilis. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who built the Hagia Sophia.
Answer: Justinian the Great (or Justinian I) Page 2

2392. In this city, 38 people allegedly watched Winston Moseley murder Kitty Genovese, a crime that inspired study of the bystander effect. In 1989, Matias Reyes committed a crime in this city but only confessed in 2002, well after full-­‐page ads demanding the death penalty were made by Donald Trump. The Son of Sam murdered people during the summer of 1976 in, for ten points, what city whose police wrongly caught the Central Park Five?
Answer: New York City (or NYC) BONUS: Kitty Genovese was murdered in this borough of New York City, home to both JFK and LaGuardia airports. It’s the second most populous borough, after Brooklyn. Queens

2393. During this Prime Minister’s tenure, The Sun ran an infamous headline declaring “Gotcha!” after a submarine controversially sunk the enemy ship General Belgrano in international waters. The IRA attempted to assassinate this Conservative leader in the Brighton Hotel Bombing. John Major succeeded, for ten points, what “Iron Lady” who led through the 1980s as the UK’s first female Prime Minister?
Answer: Margaret Hilda Thatcher BONUS: The General Belgrano was sunk during a

2394. This country was supposedly first settled by Irish monks though more extensive settlement began around the year 800 AD. Volcanic eruptions on this island have led to disruptions in transatlantic air travel in recent years. For ten points, name this country whose largest airport, found in the city of Keflavik, is named after Viking explorer Leif Ericsson.
Answer: Iceland BONUS: Iceland’s highly successful football team won a playoff game at the

2395. The planners of this event were caught after a gunfight at Holbeche House. This event was thwarted after a letter was sent to Lord Monteagle warning him to stay home. This event was planned by Robert Catesby and is commemorated on November 5. For ten points, name this 1605 plot to detonate the houses of Parliament that Guy Fawkes was unable to carry out.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot BONUS: The Gunpowder Plot was an attempt by a group of Catholics to kill this English king. James I of England (

2396. The Forsmark station was able to detect this event over 1000 kilometers away. The Red Forest was formed after this event; it is now found in an “Exclusion Zone.” An iron sarcophagus was built to mitigate the effects of this event, which helped prompt the policy of “glasnost” and rendered Pripyat uninhabitable. For ten points, name this 1986 nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union.
Answer: Chernobyl accident (

2397. After this king’s finance minister liberalized grain commerce, the ensuing grain hoarding triggered revolts known as the Flour War; this king then dismissed that minister, Turgot [tur-­‐goh], in favor of Jacques Necker. This king, who sent the Comte de Rochambeau to aid the American Revolution, was caught fleeing to Varennes with his wife, Marie Antoinette. For ten points, name this French king who was executed during the French Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16th] BONUS: Louis XVI was executed shortly before the Reign of Terror, which was orchestrated by this leader of the Committee of Public Safety. Maximilien Robespierre Page 4

2398. One of these systems was invented in the 15th century by Sejong the Great of the Joseon Dynasty; its 40 elements can be combined into over 11 thousand blocks. The oldest of these systems is an abjad with 22 entries; that Phoenician system inspired modern examples such as Greek, Cyrillic, and Latin. The first two entries in the Hebrew system inspires the name of, for ten points, what term for a set of letters used to write a language?
Answer: alphabet (

2399. This man forced the Nauvoo Expositor to shut down by destroying its press, leading to his death in Carthage Jail while awaiting trial. This man claimed to have received golden plates from the angel Moroni, as well as two seer stones, near the Sacred Grove in western New York. For ten points, name this American religious leader and founder of Mormonism.
Answer: Joseph Smith BONUS: Today, this western US

2400. Oldest American university, which merged with Radcliffe in the 20th century.
Answer: Harvard University (

2401. Connecticut Ivy League school whose secret societies include Skull and Bones.
Answer: Yale University (

2402. Oldest English university, whose 11th century origins make it older than rival Cambridge.
Answer: University of Oxford (or Oxford University)

2403. Part of the United Kingdom home to the University of St. Andrews where Prince William studied.
Answer: Scotland

2404. City whose University split into 13 separate schools after May 1968 riots, some of which are merging into the new Sorbonne University.
Answer: Paris

2405. Northern European country whose oldest university was founded in Uppsala in 1477.
Answer: Sweden

2406. City with the oldest university in Europe, located between Florence and Milan in North Central Italy
Answer: Bologna

2407. Second oldest US college, having been chartered by its royal namesakes.
Answer: The College of William and Mary in Virginia Page 6

2408. Large sea crossed by migrants fleeing Africa to Europe. Its ancient Roman name, Mare Nostrum, names a 2014 rescue operation.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea

2409. Group of 28 European nations that has debated how to handle the refugee crisis.
Answer: European Union (or EU)

2410. Middle Eastern country where civil war against Bashar al-­‐Assad has displaced the most refugees.
Answer: Syria

2411. German chancellor who was both praised and criticized for her response to the refugee crisis.
Answer: Angela Merkel

2412. River for much of Serbia and Croatia’s border which has been a challenge for refugees to cross
Answer: Danube River

2413. Greek island, home of the ancient poet Sappho, to which Turkish refugees often cross.
Answer: Lesbos

2414. Country where Prime Minister Viktor Orban built a wire fence along the Serbian border.
Answer: Hungary

2415. French coastal city on the English Channel where a large camp housed refugees until October 2016.
Answer: Calais [ca-­‐lay] Page 7

2416. War that inspired its creation and which the League of Nations failed to stop.
Answer: World War II

2417. Home country of current Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who previously worked as Prime Minister in Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal

2418. Term for the 15-­‐nation UN body in charge of international peace. Its five permanent members hold veto power.
Answer: UN Security Council (

2419. Home country of Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second Secretary General from Scandinavia.
Answer: Sweden

2420. South Korean Secretary General who left the office in 2016.
Answer: Ban Ki-­‐moon

2421. Dutch city where the Peace Palace hosts the UN’s International Court of Justice.
Answer: the Hague

2422. Secretary General from Ghana who later tried to create peace in Syria.
Answer: Kofi Annan

2423. Former Venezuelan leader who criticized George W. Bush in a speech at the UN.
Answer: Hugo Chavez Fourth Quarter Page 8

2424. The Battle of Montgisard was won by a king of this city who suffered from leprosy and was one of many rulers named Baldwin. A treaty (+) that allowed pilgrims to travel to this city ended a conflict between Saladin and Richard I over this city. (*) For ten points, name this holy city that the Crusades aimed to recapture.
Answer: Jerusalem

2425. Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll worked to develop types of these devices based on the scattering of (+) electrons. In the 17th century, Anton Van Leeuwenhoek built one of these devices to observe what he called animalcules, organisms that Robert (*) Hooke later noted were made up of cells. For ten points, name these scientific tools that allow you to see very small things.
Answer: microscope

2426. In what is now this US state, mistakes in the 1789 Treaty of Paris led to the Aroostook War. In 1820, after the Missouri (+) Compromise, this state was created by splitting off from Massachusetts. This northeastern state’s capital moved in 1832 from Portland to (*) Augusta. For ten points, name this US state that names the battleship sunk in Havana Harbor, triggering the Spanish-­‐ American War.
Answer: Maine (

2427. One of these structures had its outer layer of tura limestone appropriated for nearby construction projects, leading it to be nicknamed after its red color. The first of these structures was constructed at Saqqara and consisted of six (+) mastabas of differing sizes. A bent example of these structures was constructed on the orders of Sneferu. The only (*) remaining example of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World is an example of, for ten points, what massive Egyptian structures that cover royal tombs?
Answer: pyramids (

2428. Prince Johnson videotaped the torture of this country’s President Samuel Doe. Two women from this country and one from Yemen shared the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize; one of those women, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, opposed warlord Charles (+) Taylor, who was convicted of crimes against humanity for this country’s 20th century civil wars. (*) For ten points, name this African country whose capital, Monrovia, was founded by the American Colonization Society as a home for freed slaves.
Answer: Republic of Liberia Page 9

2429. A group of these people led by Fritigern slaughtered the Romans and killed Emperor Valens in the Battle of Adrianople. This ethnic group’s 3rd century AD appearance on the (+) frontiers of Europe hastened the fall of Rome. Alaric and Theodoric were among the leaders (*) of, for ten points, what Germanic ethnic group that was split into western and eastern branches prefixed by “Visi-­‐” and “Ostro-­‐?”
Answer: Goths (

2430. This leader’s namesake “thaw” involved the undoing of his predecessor’s cult of personality, which he attacked in the “Secret Speech” in 1956. This man’s Virgin Lands Campaign attempted to promote agriculture in (+) Kazakhstan. Leonid Brezhnev succeeded, (*) for ten points, what successor of Joseph Stalin as leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Nikita Khrushchev

2431. William Turner’s failure to zigzag may have led to this event, which took place off the Old Head of Kinsale and involved a disputed number of torpedoes. (+) An Imperial German Embassy warning appeared in ads prior to, (*) for ten points, what 1915 event in which a Cunard liner was sunk by a German U-­‐boat, killing over 100 Americans and pushing the US into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania

2432. This country’s navy was attacked by its own ally at Mers-­‐el-­‐Kebir and forced to scuttle its own ships at (+) Toulon. This country built a defensive structure called the Maginot Line that was bypassed by a (*) blitzkrieg through the Ardennes forest. For ten points, name this country that was split into German-­‐occupied north and Vichy south after its defeat in World War II.
Answer: France BONUS: During World War II, Vidkun Quisling led a collaborationist regime in what country, whose people now use “Quisling” as a synonym for traitor? Norway Page 10

2433. This country’s parliament recently held an underwater session to call attention to global warming, which threatens its population living on low-­‐lying islands. This country’s population primarily speaks a language related to Sinhalese, spoken on Sri Lanka to its northeast. For ten points, name this Indian Ocean island nation that has become popular among honeymooning couples for its resorts featuring romantic bungalows that have been built over the water.
Answer: Maldives

2434. An early metal version of these objects was called the pot-­‐de-­‐fer, and culverins were portable types of these items. The Hungarian engineer Orban designed a massive one of these objects that malfunctioned and killed him. Vauban designed star forts to defend against these weapons, which Mehmed II used to destroy the walls of Constantinople in 1453. For ten points, name these gunpowder-­‐ based artillery pieces.
Answer: cannons (or bombards

2435. This country’s prominent businesswomen include Lubna Olayan, who gave a historic address in 2004 at the Jeddah Economic Forum. This country was the target of an incoming missile in 2017 that was fired by rebels in Yemen to its south. For ten points, name this country where, in 2017, King Salman lifted a restriction on driver’s licenses that will, eventually, allow women to drive in Riyadh and Mecca.
Answer: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

2436. In 2010, nine activists trying to bring aid to this territory were killed when their “Freedom Flotilla” was raided. This region’s southwest border lies on the narrow Philadelphia Corridor, which is patrolled by an Egyptian Border Guard Force. In 2005, all Israeli settlements in this region were vacated, as were four in the West Bank. For ten points, name this self-­‐governing Palestinian territory, a strip along the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Gaza Strip (

2437. These people built elaborate catacombs to bury their dead and were blamed for a Great Fire by Nero. As a prelude to gladiatorial competitions, people in this religious group were forced to fight animals in the arena. For ten points, name this religious group of people who were persecuted in the Roman Empire for their worship of Jesus.
Answer: Roman Christians (

2438. Two answers required. Maximilian I was installed by one of these countries on the throne of the other. Ignacio Zaragoza led one of these two countries in victory against the other at the Battle of Puebla, which is commemorated by Cinco de Mayo. For ten points, name these two countries, one in Europe and one in North America, that clashed under leaders like Porfirio Diaz and Napoleon III.
Answer: Mexico and France (

2439. A joint project between the US and New Zealand called Project Seal attempted to design a bomb mimicking the effects of one of these events. An event of this type on Boxing Day devastated the Andaman Islands and Phuket in 2004. That disaster of this type began near Aceh province in the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name these disasters that are triggered by underwater earthquakes.
Answer: tsunamis (

2440. During this man's reign, a disagreement at chariot races grew into the Nika Riots, which he put down at the encouragement of his wife Theodora. This ruler’s general Belisarius recaptured Northern Africa and much of Italy, and this man codified Roman law into the Corpus Juris Civilis. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who built the Hagia Sophia.
Answer: Justinian the Great (or Justinian I) Second Quarter

2441. In 1989, Matias Reyes committed a crime in this city but only confessed in 2002, well after full-­‐ page ads demanding the death penalty were made by Donald Trump. This city’s crime rate fell dramatically under its recent mayors, Rudy Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg. The Son of Sam murdered people during the summer of 1976 in, for ten points, what city whose police wrongly caught the Central Park Five?
Answer: New York City (or NYC) BONUS: New York’s crime rate is one of the lowest in the USA for a major city. Which Midwestern city, however, the 3rd largest by population in the USA, has dealt with a major crime wave on its South Side in recent years? Chicago Page 2

2442. During this Prime Minister’s tenure, The Sun ran an infamous headline declaring “Gotcha!” after a submarine controversially sunk the enemy ship General Belgrano in international waters. The IRA attempted to assassinate this Conservative leader in the Brighton Hotel Bombing. John Major succeeded, for ten points, what “Iron Lady” who led through the 1980s as the UK’s first female Prime Minister?
Answer: Margaret Hilda Thatcher BONUS: The General Belgrano was sunk during a

2443. This country was supposedly first settled by Irish monks though more extensive settlement began around the year 800 AD. Volcanic eruptions on this island have led to disruptions in transatlantic air travel in recent years. For ten points, name this country whose largest airport, found in the city of Keflavik, is named after Viking explorer Leif Ericsson.
Answer: Iceland BONUS: Iceland’s highly successful football team won a playoff game at the

2444. The planners of this event were caught after a gunfight at Holbeche House. This event was thwarted after a letter was sent to Lord Monteagle warning him to stay home. This event was planned by Robert Catesby and is commemorated on November 5. For ten points, name this 1605 plot to detonate the houses of Parliament that Guy Fawkes was unable to carry out.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot BONUS: The Gunpowder Plot was an attempt by a group of Catholics to kill this English king. James I of England (

2445. The Forsmark station was able to detect this event over 1000 kilometers away. The Red Forest was formed after this event; it is now found in an “Exclusion Zone.” An iron sarcophagus was built to mitigate the effects of this event, which helped prompt the policy of “glasnost” and rendered Pripyat uninhabitable. For ten points, name this 1986 nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union.
Answer: Chernobyl accident (

2446. After the Flour War, this king dismissed his finance minister, Turgot [tur-­‐goh], in favor of Jacques Necker. This king, who sent the Comte de Rochambeau to aid the American Revolution, was caught fleeing to Varennes with his wife. For ten points, name this French king who was executed during the French Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16th] BONUS: Which wife of Louis XVI was also executed by the guillotine during the French Revolution? Marie Antoinette

2447. One of these systems was invented in the 15th century by Sejong the Great of the Joseon Dynasty; its 40 elements can be combined into over 11 thousand blocks. The oldest of these systems is an abjad with 22 entries; that Phoenician system inspired modern examples such as Greek, Cyrillic, and Latin. The first two entries in the Hebrew system inspires the name of, for ten points, what term for a set of letters used to write a language?
Answer: alphabet (

2448. The founder of this religious movement was killed by a mob in Carthage, Illinois. Followers of this religious movement have included Brigham Young and former US presidential candidate Mitt Romney. For ten points, name this religious movement founded by Joseph Smith, which is famous for its modestly-­‐dressed missionaries.
Answer: Mormonism (or Latter-­‐Day Saints or LDS) BONUS: Today, this western US

2449. Oldest American university, which merged with Radcliffe in the 20th century.
Answer: Harvard University (

2450. Connecticut Ivy League school whose secret societies include Skull and Bones.
Answer: Yale University (

2451. Oldest English university, whose 11th century origins make it older than rival Cambridge.
Answer: University of Oxford (or Oxford University)

2452. City whose University split into 13 separate schools after May 1968 riots, some of which are merging into the new Sorbonne University.
Answer: Paris

2453. Part of the United Kingdom home to the University of St. Andrews where Prince William studied.
Answer: Scotland

2454. Country where you’d find the oldest university in Europe, located in Emilia-­‐Romagna.
Answer: Italy Page 5

2455. Large sea crossed by migrants fleeing Africa to Europe. Its ancient Roman name, Mare Nostrum, names a 2014 rescue operation.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea

2456. Group of 28 European nations that has debated how to handle the refugee crisis.
Answer: European Union (or EU)

2457. Middle Eastern country where civil war against Bashar al-­‐Assad has displaced the most refugees.
Answer: Syria

2458. German chancellor who was both praised and criticized for her response to the refugee crisis.
Answer: Angela Merkel

2459. River for much of Serbia and Croatia’s border which has been a challenge for refugees to cross
Answer: Danube River

2460. Country where Prime Minister Viktor Orban built a wire fence along the Serbian border.
Answer: Hungary Page 6

2461. War that inspired its creation and which the League of Nations failed to stop.
Answer: World War II

2462. Home country of current Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who previously worked as Prime Minister in Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal

2463. Term for the 15-­‐nation UN body in charge of international peace. Its five permanent members hold veto power.
Answer: UN Security Council (

2464. Home country of Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second Secretary General from Scandinavia.
Answer: Sweden

2465. Dutch city where the Peace Palace hosts the UN’s International Court of Justice.
Answer: the Hague

2466. Secretary General from Ghana who later tried to create peace in Syria.
Answer: Kofi Annan Page 7

2467. The Battle of Montgisard was won by a king of this city who suffered from leprosy and was one of many rulers named Baldwin. A treaty (+) that allowed pilgrims to travel to this city ended a conflict between Saladin and Richard I over this city. (*) For ten points, name this holy city that the Crusades aimed to recapture.
Answer: Jerusalem

2468. Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll worked to develop types of these devices based on the scattering of electrons. In the 17th century, Anton (+) Van Leeuwenhoek built one of these devices to observe what he called animalcules, organisms that Robert (*) Hooke later noted were made up of cells. For ten points, name these scientific tools that allow you to see very small things.
Answer: microscope

2469. In what is now this US state, mistakes in the 1789 Treaty of Paris led to the Aroostook War. In 1820, after the Missouri (+) Compromise, this state was created by splitting off from Massachusetts. This northeastern state’s capital moved in 1832 from Portland to (*) Augusta. For ten points, name this US state that names the battleship sunk in Havana Harbor, triggering the Spanish-­‐ American War.
Answer: Maine (

2470. The first of these structures was constructed at Saqqara and consisted of six mastabas of differing sizes. (+) A bent example of these structures was constructed on the orders of Sneferu. The only remaining example of the Seven (*) Wonders of the Ancient World is an example of, for ten points, what massive Egyptian structures that cover royal tombs?
Answer: pyramids (

2471. Two women from this country and one from Yemen shared the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize; one of those women, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, opposed warlord Charles (+) Taylor, who was convicted of crimes against humanity for this country’s 20th century civil wars. (*) For ten points, name this African country whose capital, Monrovia, was founded by the American Colonization Society as a home for freed slaves.
Answer: Republic of Liberia Page 8

2472. A group of these people led by Fritigern slaughtered the Romans and killed Emperor Valens in the Battle of Adrianople. This ethnic group’s 3rd century AD appearance on the (+) frontiers of Europe hastened the fall of Rome. Alaric and Theodoric were among the leaders (*) of, for ten points, what Germanic ethnic group that was split into western and eastern branches prefixed by “Visi-­‐” and “Ostro-­‐?”
Answer: Goths (

2473. This leader’s namesake “thaw” involved the undoing of his predecessor’s cult of personality, which he attacked in the “Secret Speech” in 1956. This man’s Virgin Lands Campaign attempted to promote agriculture in (+) Kazakhstan. Leonid Brezhnev succeeded (*), for ten points, what successor of Joseph Stalin as leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Nikita Khrushchev

2474. William Turner’s failure to zigzag may have led to this event, which took place off the Old Head of Kinsale and involved a disputed number of (+) torpedoes. An Imperial German Embassy warning appeared in ads prior to, for ten points, what 1915 event in which a (*) Cunard liner was sunk by a German U-­‐boat, killing over 100 Americans and pushing the US into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania

2475. This country’s navy was attacked by its own ally at Mers-­‐el-­‐Kebir and forced to scuttle its own ships at (+) Toulon. This country built a defensive structure called the Maginot Line that was bypassed by a (*) blitzkrieg through the Ardennes forest. For ten points, name this country that was split into German-­‐occupied north and Vichy south after its defeat in World War II.
Answer: France BONUS: During World War II, Vidkun Quisling led a collaborationist regime in what country, whose people now use “Quisling” as a synonym for traitor? Norway Page 9

2476. This country’s parliament recently held an underwater session to call attention to global warming, which threatens its population living on low-­‐lying islands. This country’s population primarily speaks a language related to Sinhalese, spoken on Sri Lanka to its northeast. For ten points, name this Indian Ocean island nation that has become popular among honeymooning couples for its resorts featuring romantic bungalows that have been built over the water.
Answer: Maldives

2477. An early metal version of these objects was called the pot-­‐de-­‐fer, and culverins were portable types of these items. The Hungarian engineer Orban designed a massive one of these objects that malfunctioned and killed him. Vauban designed star forts to defend against these weapons, which Mehmed II used to destroy the walls of Constantinople in 1453. For ten points, name these gunpowder-­‐ based artillery pieces.
Answer: cannons (or bombards

2478. This country’s prominent businesswomen include Lubna Olayan, who gave a historic address in 2004 at the Jeddah Economic Forum. This country was the target of an incoming missile in 2017 that was fired by rebels in Yemen to its south. For ten points, name this country where, in 2017, King Salman lifted a restriction on driver’s licenses that will, eventually, allow women to drive in Riyadh and Mecca.
Answer: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

2479. In 2010, nine activists trying to bring aid to this territory were killed when their “Freedom Flotilla” was raided. This region’s southwest border lies on the narrow Philadelphia Corridor, which is patrolled by an Egyptian Border Guard Force. In 2005, all Israeli settlements in this region were vacated, as were four in the West Bank. For ten points, name this self-­‐governing Palestinian territory, a strip along the Mediterranean Sea.
Answer: Gaza Strip (

2480. These people built elaborate catacombs to bury their dead and were blamed for a Great Fire by Nero. As a prelude to gladiatorial competitions, people in this religious group were forced to fight animals in the arena. For ten points, name this religious group of people who were persecuted in the Roman Empire for their worship of Jesus.
Answer: Roman Christians (

2481. Two answers required. Maximilian I was installed by one of these countries on the throne of the other. Ignacio Zaragoza led one of these two countries in victory against the other at the Battle of Puebla, which is commemorated by Cinco de Mayo. For ten points, name these two countries, one in Europe and one in North America, that clashed under leaders like Porfirio Diaz and Napoleon III.
Answer: Mexico and France (

2482. A joint project between the US and New Zealand called Project Seal attempted to design a bomb mimicking the effects of one of these events. An event of this type on Boxing Day devastated the Andaman Islands and Phuket in 2004. That disaster of this type began near Aceh province in the Indian Ocean. For ten points, name these disasters that are triggered by underwater earthquakes.
Answer: tsunamis (

2483. During this man's reign, a disagreement at chariot races grew into the Nika Riots, which he put down at the encouragement of his wife Theodora. This ruler’s general Belisarius recaptured Northern Africa and much of Italy, and this man codified Roman law into the Corpus Juris Civilis. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who built the Hagia Sophia.
Answer: Justinian the Great (or Justinian I) Second Quarter

2484. In 1989, Matias Reyes committed a crime in this city but only confessed in 2002, well after full-­‐ page ads demanding the death penalty were made by Donald Trump. This city’s crime rate fell dramatically under its recent mayors, Rudy Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg. The Son of Sam murdered people during the summer of 1976 in, for ten points, what city whose police wrongly caught the Central Park Five?
Answer: New York City (or NYC) BONUS: New York’s crime rate is one of the lowest in the USA for a major city. Which Midwestern city, however, the 3rd largest by population in the USA, has dealt with a major crime wave on its South Side in recent years? Chicago Page 2

2485. During this Prime Minister’s tenure, The Sun ran an infamous headline declaring “Gotcha!” after a submarine controversially sunk the enemy ship General Belgrano in international waters. The IRA attempted to assassinate this Conservative leader in the Brighton Hotel Bombing. John Major succeeded, for ten points, what “Iron Lady” who led through the 1980s as the UK’s first female Prime Minister?
Answer: Margaret Hilda Thatcher BONUS: The General Belgrano was sunk during a

2486. This country was supposedly first settled by Irish monks though more extensive settlement began around the year 800 AD. Volcanic eruptions on this island have led to disruptions in transatlantic air travel in recent years. For ten points, name this country whose largest airport, found in the city of Keflavik, is named after Viking explorer Leif Ericsson.
Answer: Iceland BONUS: Iceland’s highly successful football team won a playoff game at the

2487. The planners of this event were caught after a gunfight at Holbeche House. This event was thwarted after a letter was sent to Lord Monteagle warning him to stay home. This event was planned by Robert Catesby and is commemorated on November 5. For ten points, name this 1605 plot to detonate the houses of Parliament that Guy Fawkes was unable to carry out.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot BONUS: The Gunpowder Plot was an attempt by a group of Catholics to kill this English king. James I of England (

2488. The Forsmark station was able to detect this event over 1000 kilometers away. The Red Forest was formed after this event; it is now found in an “Exclusion Zone.” An iron sarcophagus was built to mitigate the effects of this event, which helped prompt the policy of “glasnost” and rendered Pripyat uninhabitable. For ten points, name this 1986 nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union.
Answer: Chernobyl accident (

2489. After the Flour War, this king dismissed his finance minister, Turgot [tur-­‐goh], in favor of Jacques Necker. This king, who sent the Comte de Rochambeau to aid the American Revolution, was caught fleeing to Varennes with his wife. For ten points, name this French king who was executed during the French Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16th] BONUS: Which wife of Louis XVI was also executed by the guillotine during the French Revolution? Marie Antoinette

2490. One of these systems was invented in the 15th century by Sejong the Great of the Joseon Dynasty; its 40 elements can be combined into over 11 thousand blocks. The oldest of these systems is an abjad with 22 entries; that Phoenician system inspired modern examples such as Greek, Cyrillic, and Latin. The first two entries in the Hebrew system inspires the name of, for ten points, what term for a set of letters used to write a language?
Answer: alphabet (

2491. The founder of this religious movement was killed by a mob in Carthage, Illinois. Followers of this religious movement have included Brigham Young and former US presidential candidate Mitt Romney. For ten points, name this religious movement founded by Joseph Smith, which is famous for its modestly-­‐dressed missionaries.
Answer: Mormonism (or Latter-­‐Day Saints or LDS) BONUS: Today, this western US

2492. Oldest American university, which merged with Radcliffe in the 20th century.
Answer: Harvard University (

2493. Connecticut Ivy League school whose secret societies include Skull and Bones.
Answer: Yale University (

2494. Oldest English university, whose 11th century origins make it older than rival Cambridge.
Answer: University of Oxford (or Oxford University)

2495. City whose University split into 13 separate schools after May 1968 riots, some of which are merging into the new Sorbonne University.
Answer: Paris

2496. Part of the United Kingdom home to the University of St. Andrews where Prince William studied.
Answer: Scotland

2497. Country where you’d find the oldest university in Europe, located in Emilia-­‐Romagna.
Answer: Italy Page 5

2498. Large sea crossed by migrants fleeing Africa to Europe. Its ancient Roman name, Mare Nostrum, names a 2014 rescue operation.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea

2499. Group of 28 European nations that has debated how to handle the refugee crisis.
Answer: European Union (or EU)

2500. Middle Eastern country where civil war against Bashar al-­‐Assad has displaced the most refugees.
Answer: Syria

2501. German chancellor who was both praised and criticized for her response to the refugee crisis.
Answer: Angela Merkel

2502. River for much of Serbia and Croatia’s border which has been a challenge for refugees to cross
Answer: Danube River

2503. Country where Prime Minister Viktor Orban built a wire fence along the Serbian border.
Answer: Hungary Page 6

2504. War that inspired its creation and which the League of Nations failed to stop.
Answer: World War II

2505. Home country of current Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who previously worked as Prime Minister in Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal

2506. Term for the 15-­‐nation UN body in charge of international peace. Its five permanent members hold veto power.
Answer: UN Security Council (

2507. Home country of Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s second Secretary General from Scandinavia.
Answer: Sweden

2508. Dutch city where the Peace Palace hosts the UN’s International Court of Justice.
Answer: the Hague

2509. Secretary General from Ghana who later tried to create peace in Syria.
Answer: Kofi Annan Page 7

2510. The Battle of Montgisard was won by a king of this city who suffered from leprosy and was one of many rulers named Baldwin. A treaty (+) that allowed pilgrims to travel to this city ended a conflict between Saladin and Richard I over this city. (*) For ten points, name this holy city that the Crusades aimed to recapture.
Answer: Jerusalem

2511. Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll worked to develop types of these devices based on the scattering of electrons. In the 17th century, Anton (+) Van Leeuwenhoek built one of these devices to observe what he called animalcules, organisms that Robert (*) Hooke later noted were made up of cells. For ten points, name these scientific tools that allow you to see very small things.
Answer: microscope

2512. In what is now this US state, mistakes in the 1789 Treaty of Paris led to the Aroostook War. In 1820, after the Missouri (+) Compromise, this state was created by splitting off from Massachusetts. This northeastern state’s capital moved in 1832 from Portland to (*) Augusta. For ten points, name this US state that names the battleship sunk in Havana Harbor, triggering the Spanish-­‐ American War.
Answer: Maine (

2513. The first of these structures was constructed at Saqqara and consisted of six mastabas of differing sizes. (+) A bent example of these structures was constructed on the orders of Sneferu. The only remaining example of the Seven (*) Wonders of the Ancient World is an example of, for ten points, what massive Egyptian structures that cover royal tombs?
Answer: pyramids (

2514. Two women from this country and one from Yemen shared the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize; one of those women, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, opposed warlord Charles (+) Taylor, who was convicted of crimes against humanity for this country’s 20th century civil wars. (*) For ten points, name this African country whose capital, Monrovia, was founded by the American Colonization Society as a home for freed slaves.
Answer: Republic of Liberia Page 8

2515. A group of these people led by Fritigern slaughtered the Romans and killed Emperor Valens in the Battle of Adrianople. This ethnic group’s 3rd century AD appearance on the (+) frontiers of Europe hastened the fall of Rome. Alaric and Theodoric were among the leaders (*) of, for ten points, what Germanic ethnic group that was split into western and eastern branches prefixed by “Visi-­‐” and “Ostro-­‐?”
Answer: Goths (

2516. This leader’s namesake “thaw” involved the undoing of his predecessor’s cult of personality, which he attacked in the “Secret Speech” in 1956. This man’s Virgin Lands Campaign attempted to promote agriculture in (+) Kazakhstan. Leonid Brezhnev succeeded (*), for ten points, what successor of Joseph Stalin as leader of the Soviet Union?
Answer: Nikita Khrushchev

2517. William Turner’s failure to zigzag may have led to this event, which took place off the Old Head of Kinsale and involved a disputed number of (+) torpedoes. An Imperial German Embassy warning appeared in ads prior to, for ten points, what 1915 event in which a (*) Cunard liner was sunk by a German U-­‐boat, killing over 100 Americans and pushing the US into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania

2518. This country’s navy was attacked by its own ally at Mers-­‐el-­‐Kebir and forced to scuttle its own ships at (+) Toulon. This country built a defensive structure called the Maginot Line that was bypassed by a (*) blitzkrieg through the Ardennes forest. For ten points, name this country that was split into German-­‐occupied north and Vichy south after its defeat in World War II.
Answer: France BONUS: During World War II, Vidkun Quisling led a collaborationist regime in what country, whose people now use “Quisling” as a synonym for traitor? Norway Page 9

2519. Foreign intervention in this conflict prompted the battles of Outpost Harry and Pork Chop Hill. During this war, Matthew Ridgeway replaced a general who masterminded a decisive landing at Inchon, Douglas MacArthur. A demilitarized zone was created after an armistice was signed, though there has still been no peace treaty to end this war. For ten points, name this 1950s conflict on an Asian peninsula.
Answer: Korean War

2520. Until James Marsh developed a test for this substance, this element was an untraceable poison and earned the name “inheritance powder.” Autopsy reports and other studies found this element in the hair of Napoleon, Simon Bolivar, and King George III. For ten points, name this poisonous element, a common and deadly drinking water contaminant whose chemical symbol is As [A S].
Answer: arsenic (

2521. Two weeks before this battle, the invading force made their landing at Pevensey. During this battle, one side’s housecarls made a stand on Senlac Hill until their leader was struck in the eye by an arrow. This battle arose out of a dispute over whom Edward the Confessor named as his successor. The Bayeux Tapestry depicts the death of Harold Godwinson in, for ten points, what battle that confirmed William the Conqueror’s rule over England in 1066?
Answer: Battle of Hastings

2522. This man survived an assassination attempt in which a blind musician struck out at him with a heavy lute. The ascension of this man marked the end of the Warring States period, and he was buried alongside thousands of terracotta warriors. For ten points, name this first emperor of the Qin dynasty.
Answer: Qin Shi Huangdi

2523. This man published his anti-­‐Semitic views through his newspaper, The Dearborn Independent. This man restricted one of his products to “any color, so long as it’s black.” The US’s “Big Three” are Chrysler, General Motors and the company founded by, for ten points, what American car maker whose assembly lines built millions of Model Ts?
Answer: Henry Ford Page 1

2524. In this nation, the captain of the Bounty, William Bligh, was deposed in the Rum Rebellion. An island in this country was first reached by Abel Tasman in 1642. At Botany Bay, convicts and Aborigines met in what became an English penal colony. For ten points, name this country where, in 1770, James Cook landed near what is now the city of Sydney.
Answer: Australia

2525. Gaius Claudius Glaber tried to starve this man’s forces while they camped on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius. Many of this man’s supporters were crucified by Crassus along the Appian Way after they lost the Third Servile War. For ten points, name this former gladiator who died in 71 BC while leading a slave revolt against the Roman Republic.
Answer: Spartacus

2526. This artist sculpted the facade of a memorial for Julius II, including a seated sculpture of Moses with small horns. A sculpture of a Biblical hero by this artist was originally commissioned for the Duomo Cathedral and lacks both a sword and the severed head of a giant, unlike a similar work by Donatello. For ten points, name this Italian artist of a nude marble David and the ceiling frescos of the Sistine Chapel.
Answer: Michelangelo Buonarroti (

2527. In this city, Walter Ulbricht initially denied building what later became known as the Anti-­‐ Fascist Protection Rampart. In 1963, JFK claimed that it was the “proudest boast” of a free person to be a citizen of this city. Later, Ronald Reagan spoke in front of this city’s Brandenburg Gate and commanded Gorbachev to tear down this city’s wall. For ten points, name this once-­‐divided city whose eastern half served as the capital of East Germany.
Answer: Berlin

2528. This ruled used the death of Philip IV and a dowry owed to this man’s nation to start the War of the Devolution. This king ended toleration for Huguenots in the Edict of Fontainebleau, which revoked the Edict of Nantes. The death of Cardinal Mazarin began the 72-­‐year-­‐long reign of, for ten points, what absolutist “Sun King” of France?
Answer: Louis XIV [14] Second Quarter Page 2

2529. In 1966, Secretary of State Dean Rusk asked this leader if a recent order applied to American soldiers in his country’s cemeteries. Lester Pearson noted that “Canadians do not need to be liberated” in his criticism of this man’s declaration of “vive le Quebec libre.” This leader signed the Evian Accords, leading to the independence of Algeria. For ten points, name this first president of the Fifth Republic who led Free France in World War II.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle BONUS: In

2530. This country is the birthplace of a religion that uses purification rituals called harae [ha-­‐rah-­‐ay] and whose holiest shrine is rebuilt every 20 years. In 1995, a doomsday cult carried out a sarin attack in this nation’s largest city. The Ise [ee-­‐say] and Yasukuni shrines can be found in, for ten points, what Asian country where Shinto developed in the 8th century and is practiced in Tokyo?
Answer: Japan BONUS: In Japan, Shinbutsu-­‐shugo is a syncretism, or mixed religion, of aspects of Shinto with which other world religion, commonly practiced in Thailand and Tibet? Buddhism

2531. In this country, students were attacked in the Night of the Pencils during Jorge Videla’s presidency. Left-­‐wing Montoneros were killed during a rally for a returning leader of this country who had been supported by the descamisados, or “shirtless ones.” In the 1970s and 80s, this country experienced a period of state terrorism called the Dirty War. Evita was the First Lady of, for ten points, what South American country ruled from Buenos Aires?
Answer: Argentina (or the Argentine Republic) BONUS: During the Ezeiza Massacre, the Montoneros had gathered to see this man, the husband of Evita, return from exile. The Dirty War began after this man’s third wife, Isabel, was deposed. Juan Domingo Peron Page 3

2532. Mary Phagan’s murder inspired a resurrection of this group, which had been suppressed by Ulysses Grant’s Force Acts. This group’s first revival took place at Stone Mountain, where its members adopted clothing inspired by the film Birth of a Nation and burned a cross. For ten points, name this American white supremacist group.
Answer: Ku Klux Klan BONUS: This Confederate general was a prominent early leader of the KKK and possibly its first Grand Wizard. During the Civil War, this man’s troops massacred surrendering black Union troops in the Fort Pillow Massacre. Nathan Bedford Forrest

2533. In 1970, this country’s leader, Yakubu Gowon, put down a revolt from the breakaway region of Biafra. In a more recent conflict, this country faced the kidnapping of over 200 schoolgirls from Chibok, a crime committed by Boko Haram. Muhammadu Buhari leads, for ten points, what oil-­‐rich West African country where 8 million people live in Lagos?
Answer: Federal Republic of Nigeria BONUS: Lagos served as the first capital of Nigeria, but has since been replaced by this planned capital city in the center of the country. Abuja

2534. This country’s caves of Tora Bora served as the headquarters of an insurgency. The Northern Alliance was formed to defend this country and received Western support when this country was invaded in Operation Enduring Freedom after 9/11. For ten points, name this country where, in 2001, NATO troops toppled the Taliban government.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan BONUS: The NATO invasion in

2535. The third of these people died shortly after giving birth to a son whose betrothal ended the War of the Rough Wooing. The fourth of these people was known as the “King’s Beloved Sister” because she never consummated her marriage; that woman was Anne of Cleves. Clement VII refused to annul a marriage involving one of these women, leading to the creation of the Anglican Church. Catherine of Aragon was the first of, for ten points, what group of six women married to an English king?
Answer: wives of Henry VIII (do not

2536. In a famous poem that ends with the death of Turnus, refugees from this war found a new city to its west under the leadership of Aeneas. During this war, the body of Hector was dragged behind a chariot. Paris’ kidnapping of Helen triggered this war, in which the invulnerable Achilles was shot in the heel. For ten points, name this legendary 10-­‐year conflict in Asia Minor, ended after a Greek ruse involving a wooden horse.
Answer: Trojan War BONUS: What creator of the Trojan Horse and king of Ithaca is featured in his own Homerian epic, a sequel to the Iliad? Odysseus (or Ulysses

2537. Tartan-­‐patterned garments, similar to skirts, that originated in the Scottish Highlands.
Answer: kilts

2538. Musical instrument long considered a tool of war in the Scottish army, consisting of a chanter, drones, and a blowstick.
Answer: bagpipes

2539. London church where Edward Longshanks brought the captured Stone of Scone in 1296.
Answer: Westminster Abbey

2540. Knight who joined Andrew Moray to beat the English at Stirling Bridge, eight years before he was hanged for treason.
Answer: William Wallace

2541. 1995 quasi-­‐historical film in which Mel Gibson plays that knight.
Answer: Braveheart

2542. Its national sport, whose roots date back to at least the 16th century, and which is played at links courses
Answer: Golf

2543. 14th century King of Scots who beat Edward II at Bannnockburn in 1314.
Answer: Robert the Bruce (or Robert I

2544. Rebellions in 1715 and 1745 that sought to restore a Catholic monarch to the British throne.
Answer: Jacobite rebellions (or Jacobite risings, etc.) Page 6

2545. 3,000-­‐year-­‐old language, used to write most of the Tanakh, whose modern form has adopted numerous European influences.
Answer: Hebrew

2546. Neighborhoods where minorities, like Jews in Nazi-­‐controlled Warsaw, were forced to live.
Answer: ghettoes

2547. Occupation that Jews were often forced to take because they were not affected by the Catholic Church’s ban on usury. Examples include the Rothschild family.
Answer: banker (or moneylender; or finance or equivalents related to charging interest on loans)

2548. Term for outbursts of violence against Jews in the Russian Empire.
Answer: pogroms

2549. Religious group that was often tolerant of Jews, since it classified them as dhimmi, or people of the book.
Answer: Islam

2550. Country where Ferdinand and Isabella forced all Jews to either convert or flee into exile.
Answer: Spain

2551. 19th century “affair” in which a Jewish French army officer was falsely accused of treason.
Answer: (Alfred) Dreyfus affair

2552. 12th century Jewish scholar born in Cordova who wrote a code of Jewish law called the Mishneh Torah.
Answer: Maimonides (or Moses ben Maimon) Page 7

2553. Substance that spilled and polluted the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded.
Answer: crude oil (or petroleum)

2554. Water delivery structures, such as the Pont du Gard and one in Segovia, built by the Romans.
Answer: aqueducts

2555. Country where the Turpan oasis provides water to Uighurs [wee-­‐gurs] in Xinjiang [shin-­‐jiang] Province.
Answer: People’s Republic of China

2556. Ancient Greek inventor of a water-­‐lifting screw and, supposedly, a death ray.
Answer: Archimedes of Syracuse

2557. Sea that has largely dried up since the Amu Darya and Syr Darya were diverted for irrigation by the Soviets.
Answer: Aral Sea

2558. Southeast Asian empire that built barays to store water near Angkor Wat.
Answer: Khmer Empire (do not

2559. Two seas that were connected by the opening of the Suez Canal.
Answer: Red and Mediterranean

2560. Abbasid caliph who built a qanat for water in Mecca, as well as the House of Wisdom in Baghdad.
Answer: Harun al-­‐Rashid Page 8

2561. This president criticized Senators Joseph Martin, Bruce Barton and Hamilton Fish for their conservative stances on military buildup. Owen Roberts’ “switch (+) in time that saved nine” prevented this man from expanding the Supreme Court to 15 justices. During this man’s presidency, Congress passed the (*) Social Security Act as his “Fireside Chats” calmed America in the Great Depression. For ten points, name this president who enacted the New Deal and led the US in World War II.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (or FDR

2562. Evidence for this molecule’s purpose was found in the 1952 Hershey-­‐Chase experiment using sulfur, phosphorous, and (+) bacteriophages. X-­‐ray diffraction pictures taken by Rosalind Franklin helped earn (*) Watson and Crick a Nobel Prize for determining the double helix structure of, for ten points, what molecule that carries genetic instructions?
Answer: DNA (or deoxyribonucleic acid)

2563. It’s not Prague, but in 1572 in this city, a man known as “Besme” [BAIM] stabbed an admiral and threw him out a window, where he was then decapitated. Shortly after Margaret of Valois was married in this city, a massacre of (+) Huguenots took place on Saint Bartholomew’s Day. In converting to Catholicism, Henry IV claimed that this city was (*) “well worth a mass.” For ten points, name this capital city, the site of much strife during the French Wars of Religion.
Answer: Paris

2564. This man was arrested in Tokyo for possession of marijuana in 1980, canceling a Wings tour and ultimately causing the breakup of that band. Songs such as “Got to (+) Get You Into My Life,” and “Magical Mystery Tour” were sung by this man, who co-­‐wrote them with a man whose solo career included “Cold Turkey” and (*) “Imagine.” For ten points, name this collaborator with John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr in the Beatles.
Answer: (James) Paul McCartney Page 9

2565. This battle was the subject of the Gesta Henrici Quinti, a propaganda piece that has made historians question whether a baggage train was attacked at the beginning or end of this battle. (+) Stakes and muddy ground hampered the effectiveness of one side’s cavalry in this battle which, like the Battle of (*) Crecy 70 years earlier, reaffirmed the superiority of the longbow. For ten points, name this 1415 battle of the Hundred Years’ War, a victory for England on Saint Crispin’s Day.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt

2566. The Conference of Nyon condemned Italian submarine attacks in this war, which included Operation (+) Rugen. The term “fifth column” was coined by Emilio Mola during this war. In this war, the Abraham Lincoln Brigade fought alongside republicans and the (*) German Condor Legion bombed Guernica. For ten points, name this 1936 to 1939 war that ended when Francisco Franco captured Madrid.
Answer: Spanish Civil War

2567. This emperor put down a minor revolt in his empire at Taxila, and he ruled his kingdom from (+) Maghda. This ruler’s sculpture of lions at Sarnath and his 24-­‐spoked “wheel of righteousness” were designed after he waged a bloody war in Kalinga, after which he converted to Buddhism. (*) For ten points, name this descendant of Chandragupta, a ruler of the Mauryan Empire.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Ashoka Maurya

2568. During the Reformation, this country underwent two civil wars called the Wars of Kappel. The three (+) cantons of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden joined to form this country in 1291. This country was the site of renowned mercenaries, including the bodyguard of the (*) Pope, and hosted John Calvin in the city of Geneva. For ten points, name this neutral Alpine country led from Bern.
Answer: Switzerland

2569. During this war, Matthew Ridgeway replaced a general who masterminded a decisive landing at Inchon, Douglas MacArthur. A demilitarized zone was created after an armistice was signed, though there has still been no peace treaty to end this war. For ten points, name this 1950s conflict on an Asian peninsula.
Answer: Korean War

2570. This man survived an assassination attempt in which a blind musician struck out at him with a heavy lute. The ascension of this man marked the end of the Warring States period, and he was buried alongside thousands of terracotta warriors. For ten points, name this first emperor of the Qin dynasty.
Answer: Qin Shi Huangdi

2571. During this battle, one side’s housecarls made a stand on Senlac Hill until their leader was struck in the eye by an arrow. This battle arose out of a dispute over whom Edward the Confessor named as his successor. The Bayeux Tapestry depicts the death of Harold Godwinson in, for ten points, what battle that confirmed William the Conqueror’s rule over England in 1066?
Answer: Battle of Hastings

2572. In this nation, the captain of the Bounty, William Bligh, was deposed in the Rum Rebellion. An island in this country was first reached by Abel Tasman in 1642. At Botany Bay, convicts and Aborigines met in what became an English penal colony. For ten points, name this country where, in 1770, James Cook landed near what is now the city of Sydney.
Answer: Australia

2573. This artist sculpted the facade of a memorial for Julius II, including a seated sculpture of Moses with small horns. A sculpture of a Biblical hero by this artist was originally commissioned for the Duomo Cathedral and lacks both a sword and the severed head of a giant, unlike a similar work by Donatello. For ten points, name this Italian artist of a nude marble David and the ceiling frescos of the Sistine Chapel.
Answer: Michelangelo Buonarroti (

2574. In 1963, JFK claimed that it was the “proudest boast” of a free person to be a citizen of this city. Later, Ronald Reagan spoke in front of this city’s Brandenburg Gate and commanded Gorbachev to tear down this city’s wall. For ten points, name this once-­‐divided city whose eastern half served as the capital of East Germany.
Answer: Berlin

2575. This ruler signed the Treaty of Ryswick to end a lengthy war against a “Grand Alliance” that opposed him. This king ended toleration for Huguenots in the Edict of Fontainebleau, which revoked the Edict of Nantes. The death of Cardinal Mazarin began the 72-­‐year-­‐long reign of, for ten points, what absolutist “Sun King” of France?
Answer: Louis XIV [14]

2576. This man published his anti-­‐Semitic views through his newspaper, The Dearborn Independent. This man restricted one of his products to “any color, so long as it’s black.” The US’s “Big Three” are Chrysler, General Motors and the company founded by, for ten points, what American car maker whose assembly lines built millions of Model Ts?
Answer: Henry Ford Second Quarter

2577. In 1966, Secretary of State Dean Rusk asked this leader if a recent order applied to American soldiers in his country’s cemeteries. Lester Pearson noted that “Canadians do not need to be liberated” in his criticism of this man’s declaration of “vive le Quebec libre.” This leader signed the Evian Accords, leading to the independence of Algeria. For ten points, name this first president of the Fifth Republic who led Free France in World War II.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle BONUS: In

2578. In this country, left-­‐wing Montoneros were killed at the Ezeiza Airport during a rally for a returning leader of this country who had been supported by the descamisados, or “shirtless ones.” In the 1970s and 80s, this country experienced a period of state terrorism called the Dirty War. Evita was the First Lady of, for ten points, what South American country ruled from Buenos Aires?
Answer: Argentina (or the Argentine Republic) BONUS: During the Ezeiza Massacre, the Montoneros had gathered to see this man, the husband of Evita, return from exile. The Dirty War began after this man’s third wife, Isabel, was deposed. Juan Domingo Peron

2579. Mary Phagan’s murder inspired a resurrection of this group, which had been suppressed by Ulysses Grant’s Force Acts. This group’s first revival took place at Stone Mountain, where its members adopted clothing inspired by the film Birth of a Nation and burned a cross. For ten points, name this American terrorist white supremacist group.
Answer: Ku Klux Klan BONUS: This Confederate general was a prominent early leader of the KKK and possibly its first Grand Wizard. During the Civil War, this man’s troops massacred surrendering black Union troops in the Fort Pillow Massacre. Nathan Bedford Forrest

2580. In 1970, this country’s leader, Yakubu Gowon, put down a revolt from the breakaway region of Biafra. In a more recent conflict, this country faced the kidnapping of over 200 schoolgirls from Chibok, a crime committed by Boko Haram. Muhammadu Buhari leads, for ten points, what oil-­‐rich West African country where 8 million people live in Lagos?
Answer: Federal Republic of Nigeria BONUS: Lagos served as the first capital of Nigeria, but has since been replaced by this planned capital city in the center of the country. Abuja Page 3

2581. The Northern Alliance was formed to defend this country and received Western support when this country was invaded in Operation Enduring Freedom after 9/11. For ten points, name this country where, in 2001, NATO troops toppled the Taliban government.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan BONUS: The NATO invasion in

2582. The third of these people died shortly after giving birth while the second and fifth of these people were beheaded. The fourth of these people was known as the “King’s Beloved Sister;” that woman was Anne of Cleves. Catherine Parr was the last of, and Catherine of Aragon was the first of, for ten points, what group of six women married to an English king?
Answer: wives of Henry VIII (do not

2583. In a famous poem, refugees from this war found a new city to its west under the leadership of Aeneas. During this war, the body of Hector was dragged behind a chariot. Paris’ kidnapping of Helen triggered this war, in which the invulnerable Achilles was shot in the heel. For ten points, name this legendary 10-­‐year conflict in Asia Minor, ended after a Greek ruse involving a wooden horse.
Answer: Trojan War BONUS: What creator of the Trojan Horse and king of Ithaca is featured in his own Homerian epic, a sequel to the Iliad? Odysseus (or Ulysses

2584. This country’s holiest shrine is rebuilt every 20 years. In 1995, a doomsday cult carried out a sarin attack in this nation’s largest city. The Ise [ee-­‐say] and Yasukuni shrines can be found in, for ten points, what Asian country where Shinto developed in the 8th century and is practiced in Tokyo?
Answer: Japan BONUS: In Japan, Shinbutsu-­‐shugo is a syncretism, or mixed religion, of aspects of Shinto with which other world religion, commonly practiced in Thailand and Tibet? Buddhism Page 4

2585. Tartan-­‐patterned garments, similar to skirts, that originated in the Scottish Highlands.
Answer: kilts

2586. Musical instrument long considered a tool of war in the Scottish army, consisting of a chanter, drones, and a blowstick.
Answer: bagpipes

2587. London church where Edward Longshanks brought the captured Stone of Scone in 1296.
Answer: Westminster Abbey

2588. Its national sport, whose roots date back to at least the 16th century, and which is played at links courses
Answer: Golf

2589. Knight who joined Andrew Moray to beat the English at Stirling Bridge, eight years before he was hanged for treason.
Answer: William Wallace

2590. 1995 quasi-­‐historical film in which Mel Gibson plays that knight.
Answer: Braveheart Page 5

2591. 3,000-­‐year-­‐old language, used to write most of the Tanakh, whose modern form has adopted numerous European influences.
Answer: Hebrew

2592. Neighborhoods where minorities, like Jews in Nazi-­‐controlled Warsaw, were forced to live.
Answer: ghettoes

2593. Occupation that Jews were often forced to take because they were not affected by the Catholic Church’s ban on usury. Examples include the Rothschild family.
Answer: banker (or moneylender; or finance or equivalents related to charging interest on loans)

2594. Country where Ferdinand and Isabella forced all Jews to either convert or flee into exile.
Answer: Spain

2595. Religious group that was often tolerant of Jews, since it classified them as dhimmi, or people of the book.
Answer: Islam

2596. 19th century “affair” in which a Jewish French army officer was falsely accused of treason.
Answer: (Alfred) Dreyfus affair Page 6

2597. Substance that spilled and polluted the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded.
Answer: crude oil (or petroleum)

2598. Water delivery structures, such as the Pont du Gard and one in Segovia, built by the Romans.
Answer: aqueducts

2599. Country where the Turpan oasis provides water to Uighurs [wee-­‐gurs] in Xinjiang [shin-­‐jiang] Province.
Answer: People’s Republic of China

2600. Ancient Greek inventor of a water-­‐lifting screw and, supposedly, a death ray.
Answer: Archimedes of Syracuse

2601. Sea that has largely dried up since the Amu Darya and Syr Darya were diverted for irrigation by the Soviets.
Answer: Aral Sea

2602. Two seas that were connected by the opening of the Suez Canal.
Answer: Red and Mediterranean Page 7

2603. Owen Roberts’ “switch in time that saved nine” prevented this man from expanding the Supreme Court to 15 justices. During this man’s presidency, Congress passed the (+) Social Security Act as his “Fireside Chats” calmed America in the Great (*) Depression. For ten points, name this president who enacted the New Deal and led the US in World War II.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (or FDR

2604. Evidence for this molecule’s purpose was found in the 1952 Hershey-­‐Chase experiment using sulfur, phosphorous, and (+) bacteriophages. X-­‐ray diffraction pictures taken by Rosalind Franklin helped earn (*) Watson and Crick a Nobel Prize for determining the double helix structure of, for ten points, what molecule that carries genetic instructions?
Answer: DNA (or deoxyribonucleic acid)

2605. It’s not Prague, but in 1572 in this city, a man known as “Besme” [BAIM] stabbed an admiral and threw him out a window, where he was then decapitated. Shortly after Margaret of Valois was married in this city, a massacre of (+) Huguenots took place on Saint Bartholomew’s Day. In converting to Catholicism, Henry IV claimed that this city was (*) “well worth a mass.” For ten points, name this capital city, the site of much strife during the French Wars of Religion.
Answer: Paris

2606. This man was arrested in Tokyo for possession of marijuana in 1980, canceling a Wings tour and ultimately causing the breakup of that band. Songs such as “Got to (+) Get You Into My Life,” and “Magical Mystery Tour” were sung by this man, who co-­‐wrote them with a man whose solo career included “Cold Turkey” and (*) “Imagine.” For ten points, name this collaborator with John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr in the Beatles.
Answer: (James) Paul McCartney

2607. This battle was the subject of the Gesta Henrici Quinti, a propaganda piece that has made historians question whether a baggage train was attacked at the beginning or end of this battle. Stakes and muddy ground hampered the effectiveness of one side’s cavalry in this battle which, like the Battle of (+) Crecy 70 years earlier, reaffirmed the superiority of the longbow. (*) For ten points, name this 1415 battle of the Hundred Years’ War, a victory for England on Saint Crispin’s Day.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt Page 8

2608. The term “fifth column” was coined by Emilio Mola during this war. In this war, the Abraham (+) Lincoln Brigade fought alongside republicans and the German Condor Legion bombed (*) Guernica. For ten points, name this 1936 to 1939 war that ended when Francisco Franco captured Madrid.
Answer: Spanish Civil War

2609. This emperor, known as “Beloved-­‐of-­‐the-­‐Gods,” put down a minor revolt in his empire at Taxila, and he ruled his kingdom from (+) Maghda. This ruler’s sculpture of four-­‐outward facing lions at Sarnath and his 24-­‐spoked “wheel of righteousness” were designed after he waged a bloody war in Kalinga, after which he converted to Buddhism. (*) For ten points, name this descendant of Chandragupta, a ruler of the Mauryan Empire.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Ashoka Maurya

2610. During the Reformation, this country underwent two civil wars called the Wars of Kappel.. The three (+) cantons of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden joined to form this country in the Federal Charter of 1291. This country was the site of renowned mercenaries, including the bodyguard of the (*) Pope, and hosted John Calvin in the city of Geneva. For ten points, name this Alpine confederacy governed from Bern that is traditionally neutral in European wars.
Answer: Switzerland

2611. This nation, which conquered the German base of Tsingtao during World War I as part of its alliance with Britain, joined Britain, Italy, and France as permanent members on the League of Nations’ executive council. The (+) Doolittle raids attacked this country. Economic conglomerates called (*) zaibatsu were created in, for ten points, what Asian empire that annexed neighboring Korea in 1910 and was led by Hideki Tojo in World War II?
Answer: Empire of Japan BONUS: What Norse explorer

2612. In 1858, this object was recast in Whitechapel, after which a team spent 18 hours hauling this object to its belfry. This object was silenced following the death of Margaret Thatcher, and is currently disconnected during renovations of Elizabeth Tower. “Quarter bells” that play the Westminster Chimes every 15 minutes accompany, for ten points, what massive bell that names an iconic London clock tower?
Answer: Big Ben (

2613. This man challenged Polus and Callicles in a debate over the importance of rhetoric. This husband of Xanthippe was put to death by an Athenian tribunal by drinking hemlock on charges of corrupting the youth. For ten points, name this classical Athenian philosopher whose namesake “method” employs rigorous questioning and who mentored Plato.
Answer: Socrates

2614. A European-­‐inspired Estado Novo period in this country marked the end of “coffee with milk” politics. The petroleum company Petrobras was nationalized by President Getulio Vargas in this country. For ten points, what country’s 20th century modernization included Oscar Niemeyer’s designing of a new capital city to replace Rio de Janeiro?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil

2615. During this battle, heavy fighting took place near Papelotte and La Haye Sainte. Michel Ney led a failed cavalry charge against the British during this battle, where the British Foot guards repelled an attack by the French Imperial Guard, their first defeat. The arrival of the Prussian army under Blucher swung the tide in, for ten points, what 1815 victory for the Duke of Wellington, the last major battle of the Napoleonic Wars?
Answer: Battle of Waterloo

2616. This man stuck a needle in his own eye during his studies on light and color, which he published in Opticks. This man feuded with Gottfried Leibniz over credit for the invention of calculus, a system of math that inspired, but was not proven in, this man’s Principia Mathematica. For ten points, name this English scientist who developed the law of universal gravitation and the three laws of motion.
Answer: Sir Isaac Newton Page 1

2617. In a lawsuit involving this city and its northern suburb, Daniel Webster argued against the Warren Bridge Company in the Charles River Bridge case. A 1773 incident in this city led to the Coercive Acts and began when men boarded the Beaver and other ships dressed as Mohawk Indians. For ten points, name this city where Samuel Adams led a disruptive Tea Party.
Answer: Boston

2618. The ancient Olympic Games were held to commemorate this deity. A gold-­‐and-­‐ivory sculpture of this deity was one of the original Seven Wonders of the World and was sculpted by Phidias. The eagle and bull represented, for ten points, what husband of Hera and Greek god of thunder?
Answer: Zeus

2619. These people, who received stipends in units of rice called koku, first rose to prominence during the Kamakura shogunate. Members of this class who were no longer employed were known as ronin. These warriors had the right to bear katanas and followed the bushido code of honor. For ten points, name this noble military class in medieval Japan.
Answer: samurai (

2620. On this continent, Alfred Kroeber studied a man nicknamed Ishi who was the last of the Yahi tribe. The settlement of L’Anse aux Meadows [lahnse oh meadow] is located on an island just off this continent. Cahokia Mounds provides evidence of pre-­‐Columbian civilizations on, for ten points, what home continent of the Mississippian culture?
Answer: North America (

2621. This group expanded operations in Prussia at the request of Konrad of Masovia. This group failed to take Pskov from Alexander Nevsky after being defeated on Lake Peipus in the Battle of the Ice. The influence of this group declined after losing at Grunwald to Poland-­‐Lithuania. For ten points, name this group of German crusaders.
Answer: Teutonic Order (or Teutonic Knights

2622. This man was arrested for launching an unsuccessful raid on the Moncada Barracks in a failed revolution. Despite that setback, this man’s later movement of 26th July was able to overthrow Fulgencio Batista with the aid of Che Guevara. For ten points, name this former Communist president of Cuba who died in 2016.
Answer: Fidel Castro BONUS: This man, Fidel’s brother, took power in

2623. News of this battle prompted Lord North to proclaim, “Oh God, it’s all over.” This battle began when the Continental Army and Comte de Rochambeau’s forces besieged the namesake city. For ten points, name this 1781 battle that forced Charles Cornwallis to surrender to George Washington, effectively ending the American Revolution.
Answer: Battle of Yorktown BONUS: The victory at Yorktown was made possible by the Comte de Grasse’s September 5th victory at the mouth of this bay northeast of Yorktown, preventing the British fleet from assisting Cornwallis. Chesapeake Bay

2624. A tragedy in this city was recounted in the writings of J.Z. Howell, who noted that nobody dared to wake the Nawab of Bengal. This city was the site of Fort William, whose troops were captured in 1756 and crammed into a tiny space. Over one hundred British soldiers were suffocated to death in, for ten points, what east Indian city’s “Black Hole?”
Answer: Calcutta (or Kolkata

2625. Two answers required. In the largest clash between these two countries, the invading side lost their king at Flodden Field. A queen of one of these countries was implicated in the Babington Plot and executed by the other’s queen, Elizabeth I. For ten points, name these two countries that were unified in 1707 and share a border on the isle of Great Britain.
Answer: Scotland and England (

2626. This group was compromised during an incident in Media, Pennsylvania when the “Citizen’s Commission” raided one of its member’s homes, recovering files that detailed this group’s COINTELPRO program. An infamous letter encouraging Martin Luther King to commit suicide was written and sent by this agency under the direction of Clyde Tolson’s mentor. For ten points, name this domestic American security service led for a long time by J. Edgar Hoover.
Answer: Federal Bureau of Investigation (or FBI) BONUS: This other American security service, responsible for electronic surveillance, was exposed by Edward Snowden, and has recently been the subject of a hacking scandal.

2627. Chris Patten departed this region on the yacht Britannia in 1997. This region has been known as a Special Administrative Region for 20 years, and it is bordered by the Special Economic Zone of Shenzhen to its north. This region was captured from China for 150 years after the Opium Wars, though the United Kingdom has since returned it. For ten points, name this large city on the South China Sea.
Answer: Hong Kong BONUS: Hong Kong is one of two Special Administrative Regions in Southern China; this other Special Administrative Region was returned to China by Portugal in

2628. During this event, a man declared “fortune favors the brave” while hoping to save his friends, Rectina and Pomponianus at Stabiae. Prior to this event, an observer in Misenum noted an unusually dense and rapidly rising cloud. Letters describing this event were written to Tacitus by Pliny the Younger, whose uncle died in it. For ten points, name this 79 AD natural disaster that covered the towns of Herculaneum and Pompeii in ash.
Answer: eruption of Mount Vesuvius (

2629. This family’s coat of arms features six spheres called palle on a gold shield. Popes Clement VII and Leo X were members of this family, which was targeted by the aforementioned Pazzi Conspiracy. Michelangelo and Donatello were patronized by members of, for ten points, what powerful Italian family that included Cosimo and Lorenzo the Magnificent?
Answer: Medici family (or the House of Medici) BONUS: The Medici family dominated 15th century politics in this Italian city-­‐

2630. European country that sold Louisiana to the US.
Answer: France

2631. Third US President who made the Purchase.
Answer: Thomas Jefferson

2632. French emperor who authorized the sale.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

2633. European country that contested the purchase, having given up Louisiana in the Treaty of San Ildefonso.
Answer: Spain

2634. Port city, the largest city in the modern state of Louisiana, that was the original subject of the US’s deal.
Answer: New Orleans

2635. Two men who led the American Corps of Discovery that explored the Louisiana Territory.
Answer: Meriwether Lewis and William Clark (

2636. US Secretary of State and “Father of the Constitution” who argued that the purchase was Constitutional.
Answer: James Madison

2637. Shoshone (sho-­‐SHOW-­‐nee) woman who worked as a guide on the aforementioned expedition.
Answer: Sacagawea Page 6

2638. Soldier who was wounded at the Somme, then later led Nazi Germany.
Answer: Adolf Hitler

2639. Archduke of Austria-­‐Hungary who was shot in Sarajevo in 1914.
Answer: Archduke Franz Ferdinand (

2640. “Sick Man of Europe” that joined the Central Powers in October 1914.
Answer: Ottoman Empire

2641. Nation that sent David Lloyd George to the Paris Peace Conference.
Answer: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

2642. 1914 battle where the German advance was halted along a namesake river, leading to trench warfare.
Answer: Battle of the Marne River

2643. 1915 Allied campaign that failed to take Anzac Cove and never reached Constantinople.
Answer: Gallipoli Campaign (or Dardanelles Campaign or Battle of Canakkale)

2644. Failed German plan to capture Paris in six weeks by sweeping through Belgium.
Answer: Schlieffen Plan

2645. Country that captured South Tyrol from Austria at the end of the war.
Answer: Italy Page 7

2646. Common title used by Egyptian monarchs, such as the ruler of Egypt in the Book of Exodus.
Answer: Pharaoh

2647. Writing system of Ancient Egypt that preceded the development of demotic script.
Answer: Hieroglyphs (or Hieroglyphics)

2648. Slab, discovered in 1799, whose three writings allowed the Egyptian writing system to be deciphered from Greek.
Answer: Ro

2649. Boy king whose tomb was unearthed by Howard Carter in 1922.
Answer: King Tutankhamun

2650. Mythical creature with a human’s head and a lion’s body that is depicted in a massive sculpture in Giza.
Answer: Sphinx

2651. Egyptian city that gave its name to the largest city in Western Tennessee
Answer: Memphis

2652. First of the three “Kingdom” periods, which encompasses the Third through the Sixth Dynasties.
Answer: Old Kingdom

2653. God who was the consort of Isis and father of Horus.
Answer: Osiris Page 8

2654. In a play by this author, a man who gave away all of his money at a banquet finds a hoard of gold while living in a cave in the wilderness. This author wrote a play in which the images of an armored head, a (+) bloody child, and a crowned child warn a king of Scotland that he cannot be harmed by a man “of woman born,” though the king is later killed by (*) Macduff anyways. For ten points, name this author of the historically inspired tragedies Timon of Athens and Macbeth.
Answer: William Shakespeare

2655. The first member of this body to be expelled was William Blount; after expelling 14 members during the Civil War, it has not expelled anyone since. Under the Byrd Rule, the Parliamentarian of this body can declare what this body can do through (+) reconciliation. The standing rules of this legislative body specify a procedure known as cloture, which requires (*) 60 votes to overcome a filibuster. Each state receives two votes in, for ten points, what upper house of the US Congress?
Answer: United

2656. This building, located in the Square of Miracles, is thought to have been constructed by Diotisalvi. (+) Mussolini ordered the drilling of 100 holes into this structure as an attempt at fixing it. According to legend, this building was used to disprove an Aristotelian theory about spheres of different masses. (*) For ten points, name this Italian structure whose weak foundation gives it a famous four-­‐degree tilt.
Answer: Leaning Tower of Pisa

2657. After this city’s inhabitants insulted Caracalla, the emperor ordered all youths of this city to be put to death; their remains can be found in the Catacombs of Kom El Shoqafa, one of the wonders of the Middle Ages. Another famous building in this city may have been (+) burned when Julius Caesar was besieged here, formed part of the Musaeum, and contained over 40,000 (*) papyrus scrolls. For ten points, name this Egyptian city that possessed a famous lighthouse and library.
Answer: Alexandria

2658. The CIA’s Operation Ajax supported a 1953 coup in this country after (+) Mohammad Mossadegh nationalized its oil industry. That coup replaced this country’s only democratic government with Reza Pahlavi, a (*) Shah who was overthrown in a 1979 Islamic Revolution. For ten points, name this country where Ayatollah Khomeini was brought to power after protests in Tehran.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran Page 9

2659. The cyclic nature of these events was explained by Milutin Milankovitch’s study of eccentricity, axial tilt, and precession. One of the most severe examples of these events occurred after the Great Oxygenation event. A (+) “little” one of these events caused significant agricultural failures in the centuries after a “Medieval Warm Period.” (*) Glaciations may take place during, for ten points, what periods in which the surface temperature of the Earth decreases for a significant period of time?
Answer: ice ages

2660. To follow up on a prior promise of “peace, land, and bread,” this ruler was forced to adopt the free market New (+) Economic Policy. This ruler consolidated power after defeating the White (*) Menshevik, faction in a civil war. Though he designated Leon Trotsky as his successor, this man was ultimately replaced by Joseph Stalin. For ten points, name this first leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Vladimir Lenin (or Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov)

2661. During the sack of Vijayabahu in this country, three members of a royal family killed the King of Kotte. A temple containing a (+) tooth relic of Siddhartha Gautama can be found in this country’s city of Kandy; that temple was bombed in the 1990s by a terrorist group known as the LTTE. (*) Tamil and Sinhalese are the major languages of, for ten points, what country, once known as Ceylon, found on an island south of India?
Answer: Sri Lanka

2662. Pope Julius II tried to subdue this city by allying with France and the Holy Roman Empire in the League of (+) Cambrai. Zara and Constantinople were sacked by soldiers during the Fourth Crusade in exchange for ships from this city’s ruler, (*) Enrico Dandolo. Doges [doh-­‐zhes] ruled, for ten points, what Italian city-­‐state, a rival of Genoa known for its empire on the Adriatic and its system of canals?
Answer: (Most Serene) Republic of Venice BONUS: What Polish astronomer developed a heliocentric model, leading to a “Revolution” in astronomy named for him? Nicolas Copernicus (

2663. In 1858, this object was recast in Whitechapel, after which a team spent 18 hours hauling this object to its belfry. This object was silenced following the death of Margaret Thatcher, and is currently disconnected during renovations of Elizabeth Tower. “Quarter bells” that play the Westminster Chimes every 15 minutes accompany, for ten points, what massive bell that names an iconic London clock tower?
Answer: Big Ben (

2664. This man challenged Polus and Callicles in a debate over the importance of rhetoric. This husband of Xanthippe was put to death by an Athenian tribunal by drinking hemlock on charges of corrupting the youth. For ten points, name this classical Athenian philosopher whose namesake “method” employs rigorous questioning and who mentored Plato.
Answer: Socrates

2665. A European-­‐inspired Estado Novo period in this country marked the end of “coffee with milk” politics. The petroleum company Petrobras was nationalized by President Getulio Vargas in this country. For ten points, what country’s 20th century modernization included Oscar Niemeyer’s designing of a new capital city to replace Rio de Janeiro?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil

2666. During this battle, heavy fighting took place near Papelotte and La Haye Sainte. Michel Ney led a failed cavalry charge against the British during this battle, where the British Foot guards repelled an attack by the French Imperial Guard, their first defeat. The arrival of the Prussian army under Blucher swung the tide in, for ten points, what 1815 victory for the Duke of Wellington, the last major battle of the Napoleonic Wars?
Answer: Battle of Waterloo

2667. This man stuck a needle in his own eye during his studies on light and color, which he published in Opticks. This man feuded with Gottfried Leibniz over credit for the invention of calculus, a system of math that inspired, but was not proven in, this man’s Principia Mathematica. For ten points, name this English scientist who developed the law of universal gravitation and the three laws of motion.
Answer: Sir Isaac Newton Page 1

2668. The ancient Olympic Games were held to commemorate this deity. A gold-­‐and-­‐ivory sculpture of this deity was one of the original Seven Wonders of the World and was sculpted by Phidias. The eagle and bull represented, for ten points, what husband of Hera and Greek god of thunder?
Answer: Zeus

2669. These people, who received stipends in units of rice called koku, first rose to prominence during the Kamakura shogunate. Members of this class who were no longer employed were known as ronin. These warriors had the right to bear katanas and followed the bushido code of honor. For ten points, name this noble military class in medieval Japan.
Answer: samurai (

2670. On this continent, Alfred Kroeber studied a man nicknamed Ishi who was the last of the Yahi tribe. The settlement of L’Anse aux Meadows [lahnse oh meadow] is located on an island just off this continent. Cahokia Mounds provides evidence of pre-­‐Columbian civilizations on, for ten points, what home continent of the Mississippian culture?
Answer: North America (

2671. This man was arrested for launching an unsuccessful raid on the Moncada Barracks in a failed revolution. Despite that setback, this man’s later movement of 26th July was able to overthrow Fulgencio Batista with the aid of Che Guevara. For ten points, name this former Communist president of Cuba who died in 2016.
Answer: Fidel Castro BONUS: This man, Fidel’s brother, took power in

2672. News of this battle prompted Lord North to proclaim, “Oh God, it’s all over.” This battle began when the Continental Army and Comte de Rochambeau’s forces besieged the namesake city. For ten points, name this 1781 battle that forced Charles Cornwallis to surrender to George Washington, effectively ending the American Revolution.
Answer: Battle of Yorktown BONUS: The victory at Yorktown was made possible by the Comte de Grasse’s September 5th victory at the mouth of this bay northeast of Yorktown, preventing the British fleet from assisting Cornwallis. Chesapeake Bay Page 2

2673. A tragedy in this city was recounted in the writings of J.Z. Howell, who noted that nobody dared to wake the Nawab of Bengal. This city was the site of Fort William, whose troops were captured in 1756 and crammed into a tiny space. Over one hundred British soldiers were suffocated to death in, for ten points, what east Indian city’s “Black Hole?”
Answer: Calcutta (or Kolkata

2674. Two answers required. In the largest clash between these two countries, the invading side lost their king at Flodden Field. A queen of one of these countries was implicated in the Babington Plot and executed by the other’s queen, Elizabeth I. For ten points, name these two countries that were unified in 1707 and share a border on the isle of Great Britain.
Answer: Scotland and England (

2675. This group was compromised during an incident in Media, Pennsylvania when the “Citizen’s Commission” raided one of its member’s homes, recovering files that detailed this group’s COINTELPRO program. An infamous letter encouraging Martin Luther King to commit suicide was written and sent by this agency under the direction of Clyde Tolson’s mentor. For ten points, name this domestic American security service led for a long time by J. Edgar Hoover.
Answer: Federal Bureau of Investigation (or FBI) BONUS: This other American security service, responsible for electronic surveillance, was exposed by Edward Snowden, and has recently been the subject of a hacking scandal.

2676. Chris Patten departed this region on the yacht Britannia in 1997. This region has been known as a Special Administrative Region for 20 years, and it is bordered by the Special Economic Zone of Shenzhen to its north. This region was captured from China for 150 years after the Opium Wars, though the United Kingdom has since returned it. For ten points, name this large city on the South China Sea.
Answer: Hong Kong Page 3

2677. During this event, a man declared “fortune favors the brave” while hoping to save his friends, Rectina and Pomponianus at Stabiae. Prior to this event, an observer in Misenum noted an unusually dense and rapidly rising cloud. Letters describing this event were written to Tacitus by Pliny the Younger, whose uncle died in it. For ten points, name this 79 AD natural disaster that covered the towns of Herculaneum and Pompeii in ash.
Answer: eruption of Mount Vesuvius (

2678. This family’s coat of arms features six spheres called palle on a gold shield. Popes Clement VII and Leo X were members of this family, which was targeted by the aforementioned Pazzi Conspiracy. Michelangelo and Donatello were patronized by members of, for ten points, what powerful Italian family that included Cosimo and Lorenzo the Magnificent?
Answer: Medici family (or the House of Medici) BONUS: The Medici family dominated 15th century politics in this Italian city-­‐

2679. European country that sold Louisiana to the US.
Answer: France

2680. Third US President who made the Purchase.
Answer: Thomas Jefferson

2681. French emperor who authorized the sale.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

2682. European country that contested the purchase, having given up Louisiana in the Treaty of San Ildefonso.
Answer: Spain

2683. Port city, the largest city in the modern state of Louisiana, that was the original subject of the US’s deal.
Answer: New Orleans

2684. Two men who led the American Corps of Discovery that explored the Louisiana Territory.
Answer: Meriwether Lewis and William Clark (

2685. Soldier who was wounded at the Somme, then later led Nazi Germany.
Answer: Adolf Hitler

2686. Archduke of Austria-­‐Hungary who was shot in Sarajevo in 1914.
Answer: Archduke Franz Ferdinand (

2687. “Sick Man of Europe” that joined the Central Powers in October 1914.
Answer: Ottoman Empire

2688. Nation that sent David Lloyd George to the Paris Peace Conference.
Answer: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

2689. 1914 battle where the German advance was halted along a namesake river, leading to trench warfare.
Answer: Battle of the Marne River

2690. 1915 Allied campaign that failed to take Anzac Cove and never reached Constantinople.
Answer: Gallipoli Campaign (or Dardanelles Campaign or Battle of Canakkale) Page 6

2691. Common title used by Egyptian monarchs, such as the ruler of Egypt in the Book of Exodus.
Answer: Pharaoh

2692. Writing system of Ancient Egypt that preceded the development of demotic script.
Answer: Hieroglyphs (or Hieroglyphics)

2693. Slab, discovered in 1799, whose three writings allowed the Egyptian writing system to be deciphered from Greek.
Answer: Ro

2694. Boy king whose tomb was unearthed by Howard Carter in 1922.
Answer: King Tutankhamun

2695. Mythical creature with a human’s head and a lion’s body that is depicted in a massive sculpture in Giza.
Answer: Sphinx

2696. God who was the consort of Isis and father of Horus.
Answer: Osiris Page 7

2697. In a play by this author, a man who gave away all of his money at a banquet finds a hoard of gold while living in a cave in the wilderness. This author wrote a play in which the images of an armored head, a (+) bloody child, and a crowned child warn a king of Scotland that he cannot be harmed by a man “of woman born,” though the king is later killed by (*) Macduff anyways. For ten points, name this author of the historically inspired tragedies Timon of Athens and Macbeth.
Answer: William Shakespeare

2698. Under the Byrd Rule, the Parliamentarian of this body can declare what this body can do through reconciliation. The standing rules of this (+) legislative body specify a procedure known as cloture, which requires 60 votes to overcome a (*) filibuster. Each state receives two votes in, for ten points, what upper house of the US Congress?
Answer: United

2699. This building, located in the Square of Miracles, is thought to have been constructed by Diotisalvi. (+) Mussolini ordered the drilling of 100 holes into this structure as an attempt at fixing it. According to legend, this building was used to disprove an Aristotelian theory about spheres of different masses. (*) For ten points, name this Italian structure whose weak foundation gives it a famous four-­‐degree tilt.
Answer: Leaning Tower of Pisa

2700. One of this city's wonders of the Middle Ages is the Catacombs of Kom El Shoqafa. Another famous building in this city may have been burned when (+) Julius Caesar was besieged here, formed part of the Musaeum, and contained over 40,000 (*) papyrus scrolls. For ten points, name this Egyptian city that possessed a famous lighthouse and library.
Answer: Alexandria

2701. The CIA’s Operation Ajax supported a 1953 coup in this country after Mohammad Mossadegh nationalized its (+) oil industry. That coup replaced this country’s only democratic government with Reza Pahlavi, a Shah who was overthrown in a (*) 1979 Islamic Revolution. For ten points, name this country where Ayatollah Khomeini was brought to power after protests in Tehran.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran Page 8

2702. In a lawsuit involving this city and its northern suburb, Daniel Webster argued against the Warren Bridge Company in the Charles River Bridge case. A 1773 incident in this city led to the Coercive Acts and began when men (+) boarded the Beaver and other ships dressed as Mohawk (*) Indians. For ten points, name this New England city where Samuel Adams led a disruptive Tea Party.
Answer: Boston

2703. To follow up on a prior promise of “peace, land, and bread,” this ruler was forced to adopt the free market New Economic Policy. This ruler consolidated power after defeating the White (+) Menshevik, faction in a civil war. Though he designated Leon (*) Trotsky as his successor, this man was ultimately replaced by Joseph Stalin. For ten points, name this first leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Vladimir Lenin (or Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov)

2704. During the sack of Vijayabahu in this country, three members of a royal family killed the King of Kotte. A temple containing a tooth relic of Siddhartha Gautama can be found in this country’s city of Kandy; that temple was bombed in the 1990s by a terrorist group known as the LTTE. (+) Tamil and Sinhalese are the major languages of, for ten points, what country, once known as Ceylon, found on an island south of India?
Answer: Sri Lanka

2705. Pope Julius II tried to subdue this city by allying with France and the Holy Roman Empire in the League of (+) Cambrai. Zara and Constantinople were sacked by soldiers during the Fourth Crusade in exchange for ships from this city’s ruler, (*) Enrico Dandolo. Doges [doh-­‐zhes] ruled, for ten points, what Italian city-­‐state, a rival of Genoa known for its empire on the Adriatic and its system of canals?
Answer: (Most Serene) Republic of Venice BONUS: What Polish astronomer developed a heliocentric model, leading to a “Revolution” in astronomy named for him? Nicolas Copernicus (

2706. In 2003, the Rose Revolution forced this country’s President Eduard Shevardnadze to resign. This country was invaded in 2008 by Russia, who backed its breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, ruining Mikhail Saakashvili’s aspirations to join NATO. For ten points, name this westernmost country of the Caucasus, whose capital is Tbilisi and which is not to be confused with a US state.
Answer: Georgia

2707. This composer celebrated Romanov imperialism with the polonaise that ends his Symphony no. 3, “Polish.” This composer of the Marche Slave used “La Marseillaise” to represent Napoleon’s invading army and also wrote the music to the ballet Swan Lake. For ten points, name this Russian composer who included cannons in his 1812 Overture.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky

2708. After partnering with Hugh Meredith, this man founded a short-­‐lived publication that was the first German language paper in America. In an essay titled “The Way of Wealth”, this man claimed that “There are no gains without pains,” one of many maxims collected in an annual series that ran from 1732 to 1758 under the name Poor Richard’s Almanac. For ten points, name this US Founding Father on the $100 bill.
Answer: Benjamin Franklin

2709. This body of water is home to the Isla del Sol and the Isla de la Luna, each of which contain ruins of a 15th-­‐century civilization that flourished around its shores. Amantani Island is located on this lake and is currently home to thousands of Quechua-­‐speaking peoples. This lake was viewed as sacred by the Incans, and is described as the highest navigable lake in the world. For ten points, name this lake that straddles the Bolivia-­‐Peru border and is the largest lake in South America.
Answer: Lake Titicaca

2710. The Meech Lake Accords tried to better integrate this province with its country. A 1995 referendum narrowly rejected independence for this province, where a 1970 crisis required the first peacetime use of the War Measures Act after the FLQ kidnapped Pierre Laporte in Montreal. For ten points, name this French-­‐speaking Canadian province.
Answer: Quebec Page 1

2711. Many people fled this event on boats whose high passenger mortality rates inspired the nickname “coffin ships.” During this event, the phrase “taking the soup” was used to refer to families who accepted charity in exchange for converting to the Protestant faith. Robert Peel repealed the Corn Laws to provide relief for those impacted by, for ten points, what 1840s disaster caused by a phytophthora [FI-­‐toe-­‐THO-­‐rah] blight of a certain crop?
Answer: Irish Potato Famine (

2712. At the end of his life, Marcus Aurelius told those around him “weep not for me; think rather” of those affected by one of these disasters. The port of Piraeus [pi-­‐ray-­‐us] is the estimated starting point of one of these disasters that began in 430 BC in Athens. Under Justinian, over 20 million people were killed in one of these that was caused by Yersinia pestis. Bubonic is a type of, for ten points, what type of widely-­‐spreading disease?
Answer: plagues (

2713. This event may have been called out of anger over Urban VIII’s presentation as Simplicio in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. After this event, the central figure allegedly said “and yet it moves,” a refusal to accept this event’s result. This event began with the accusation of teaching a “false doctrine” “that the Sun is the center of the world.” The Roman Inquisition carried out, for ten points, what 17th century affair over an Italian astronomer’s heliocentrism?
Answer: the trial of Galileo Galilei (

2714. This abolitionist was nicknamed by William Lloyd Garrison due to a similarity with a prophet in the Book of Exodus. This woman helped circumvent the Fugitive Slave Act by leading expeditions down the Chesapeake coast of Maryland. For ten points, name this former slave, known as “Moses,” who guided many escaped slaves to the North on the Underground Railroad.
Answer: Harriet Tubman

2715. Two answers required. The League of the Just asked these two people to collaborate on an 1848 pamphlet that opens by stating “a specter is haunting Europe” and studies the history of class struggles. One of these men financially supported the other to do the research for his work known as Das Kapital. For ten points, name these German philosophers, the co-­‐authors of The Communist Manifesto.
Answer: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (

2716. The first Nobel Peace Prize was awarded jointly to pacifist Frederic Passy and the founder of this organization, Henri Dunant, who was inspired after witnessing the carnage of the Battle of Solferino. For ten points, name this Geneva-­‐based international organization that protects victims of war and whose member societies often provide medical services in disaster areas.
Answer: Inter

2717. This man secured power over his rivals, Cimon and Thucydides, through ostracism. This man described the greatness of his city in a celebrated funeral oration and hired Iktinos and Kallikrates to renovate the Acropolis. For ten points, name this leader of the Delian League and statesman of Athens during its Golden Age.
Answer: Pericles BONUS: Which building on the Acropolis was later severely damaged in an explosion when it was being used as an artillery dump by the Ottoman Empire? Parthenon

2718. One of these entities was killed by Tissarakkha in anger at the reverence given to it by Ashoka; a descendant of that entity can be found today at Bodh Gaya. In the 19th century, Karl Budde argued about the number of these entities in the Garden of Eden. One of these entities connected the nine worlds in Norse mythology and was known as Yggdrasil. The Buddha reached enlightenment under, for ten points, what kind of plant that, in the Garden of Eden, represents the knowledge of good and evil?
Answer: trees (

2719. In a 52 BC battle in this region, the attacking side built a wall around a besieged town, then built another wall around themselves. A work written about this region notes that it is “a whole divided into three parts” and describes the author’s victory over Vercingetorix at Alesia. For ten points, name this region that was conquered by Julius Caesar and largely corresponds with modern-­‐day France.
Answer: Gaul (or Gallia) (

2720. This country was led by Veselin Duranovic [dur-­‐AH-­‐no-­‐VITCH] after the death of its longtime leader in 1980. A partisan resistance to the Nazi occupation of this country established a Communist government after the war, led by Josip Tito. The 1992 breakup of this country led to war crimes such as the Srebrenica [sreh-­‐breh-­‐neet-­‐zah] Massacre and the Siege of Sarajevo. For ten points, name this federal Balkan country that included Serbia and Croatia.
Answer: Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia BONUS: Which northernmost former Yugoslav republic, with capital at Ljubljana, provided a major route for refugees to enter Austria during the recent European refugee crisis? Slovenia Page 4

2721. The Convention of Kanagawa was signed during this century, ending a longstanding policy of isolation. The Tokugawa Shogunate was overthrown in this century as part of a restoration of imperial power in Japan. For ten points, name this century in which the Japanese navy purchased the CSS Stonewall four years after the end of the American Civil War.
Answer: 19th century (

2722. This city is the site of an uprising where many of the Friends of the ABC are killed, but Marius Pontmercy is carried to safety from the barricade through this city’s sewers. In another novel set in this city, Claude Frollo is pushed off of a roof and falls to his death after laughing at an execution taking place in the Place de Greve [plass de grev]. For ten points, name this city, the setting of parts of Les Miserables and a cathedral where Quasimodo works as a bell ringer in The Hunchback of Notre Dame.
Answer: Paris BONUS: This author of The Hunchback of Notre Dame depicted the

2723. Tudor queen of England who ruled from 1558 to 1603.
Answer: Elizabeth I (

2724. Iberian country once ruled by the Houses of Braganza and Aviz, including Joao I.
Answer: Portugal

2725. Austrian royal house whose hereditary rule was passed to Maria Theresa via the Pragmatic Sanction.
Answer: House of Habsburg

2726. Last French royal house before the French Revolution.
Answer: House of Bourbon

2727. Name of the current ruling house of England that shares its name with a British castle.
Answer: House of Windsor

2728. Country that has been ruled by the House of Capet and the House of Valois (pr. val-­‐WAH).
Answer: France

2729. German house that ruled a namesake state and Britain after the reign of George I.
Answer: House of Hanover

2730. House that ruled a unified Italy after its namesake state united the peninsula under the prime minister Cavour.
Answer: House of Savoy Page 6

2731. Nation whose main intelligence agency was the KGB from 1954 to 1991.
Answer: Soviet Union (

2732. Current world leader who once served as a KGB agent.
Answer: Vladimir Putin

2733. American counterpart of the KGB whose leaders have included Allen Dulles.
Answer: Central Intelligence Agency (or CIA)

2734. City where the KGB tortured dissidents at its headquarters in the Lubyanka building.
Answer: Moscow

2735. Country where the KGB could not control Kabul or defeat the mujahideen during a 1980s war.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

2736. European country where Imre Nagy’s [im-­‐reh nazh’s] 1956 revolt was violently crushed by the KGB.
Answer: Hungary

2737. KGB chairman from 1967 to 1982 who briefly succeeded Leonid Brezhnev as a world leader.
Answer: Yuri Andropov Page 7

2738. Nonviolent Indian independence leader known as Bapu, who was shot by Nathuram Godse.
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (

2739. British monopoly he protested by marching to the sea at Dandi.
Answer: salt (march)

2740. Unrelated woman who was the first female Prime Minister of India.
Answer: Indira Gandhi

2741. Type of now-­‐banned test she oversaw in 1974, codenamed “Smiling Buddha.”
Answer: nuclear weapons test (

2742. City in Punjab where she authorized a raid on the Golden Temple.
Answer: Amritsar

2743. Religious background of the group attacked in that operation, as well as of her bodyguards, who assassinated her after that operation.
Answer: Sikhism

2744. Her son, who succeeded her as Prime Minister and was assassinated himself in 1991.
Answer: Rajiv Gandhi Page 8

2745. This man employed logs to hamper paratroop landings, a tactic that became known as his namesake Asparagus when this man oversaw defenses at the Atlantic (+) Wall. While this man recovered from injuries sustained in a strafing raid, he was offered cyanide pills after he was implicated in the Valkyrie assassination plot against (*) Hitler. This general fought an indecisive battle against Bernard Montgomery at El Alamein. For ten points, name this “Desert Fox” who commanded Germany’s Afrika Korps.
Answer: Erwin Rommel

2746. During his Great Expedition, this privateer raided St. Augustine. With his cousin John Hawkins, this man organized (+) fireships and won against a fleet led by the Duke of Medina Sidonia. In 1587, this captain raided Cadiz, “singing the beard of the King of Spain,” seven years after a landmark voyage on the (*) Golden Hind. For ten points, name this man, the first Englishman to circumnavigate the globe, who was employed by Elizabeth I and fought the Spanish Armada.
Answer: Sir Francis Drake

2747. Due to historical control of this country by both Arabs and Europeans, this country’s population speaks the only Semitic national language that is routinely written in the Latin alphabet. St. Paul was shipwrecked (+) in what is now this country, and during World War II, its location in the Mediterranean led to a two-­‐year siege of this country, which at the time was a British (*) colony. For ten points, name this independent Mediterranean island country famous for its knights, which lies off the coast of Sicily.
Answer: Malta

2748. Joseph Niepce [nee-­‐EPS] was one of the first practitioners of this medium, using it to create a view from his house. The 291 studio focused on this medium under the management of (+) Alfred Stieglitz. This medium was advanced by Louis Daguerre, who names an early form of this medium that reduced the necessary (*) exposure time. For ten points, name this artistic process that Ansel Adams used to portray scenes from American national parks in the 20th century.
Answer: photography (

2749. A speech introducing this religion to the U.S. at the 1893 Parliament of the World's Religions began “sisters and brothers of America” and was given by (+) Swami Vivekananda. A liberation from the birth-­‐rebirth cycle sought in this religion is known as moksha. Opposition to this religion’s (*) Brahmanist caste system led to the development of Jainism and Buddhism. For ten points, name this predominant religion of India.
Answer: Hinduism Page 9

2750. This ruler is depicted with Shamash at the top of an Akkadian-­‐language monument that commands, “If a man destroy the (*) eye of another man, they shall destroy his eye.” For ten points, name this Babylonian ruler who wrote an early law code.
Answer: Hammurabi

2751. During his time as governor of Africa, this man was pelted by turnips and found himself in financial difficulty, causing him to turn to the mule trade. This man fell out of imperial favor after falling asleep during one of (+) Nero’s lyre recitals. During the Great Jewish Revolt, this man threw captured prisoners into the Dead Sea to test its legendary buoyancy; that revolt was later crushed by his son (*) Titus. For ten points, name this founder of the Flavian dynasty, the last Emperor during the Year of the Four Emperors.
Answer: Vespasian

2752. Two answers required. The U.S. agreed to end trade relations with one of these two countries if the other would grant safe passage to American merchant vessels by the terms of Macon’s Bill Number Two. The (+) Non-­‐Intercourse Act prevented American trade with these two countries, and commerce between the U.S. and these two countries virtually ended with the passage of the (*) Embargo Act. For ten points, name these two European powers that vied for American economic support during the Napoleonic Wars.
Answer: England and France (

2753. The Carlsbad Decrees put an end to fraternities known as burschenschaft that pushed for this cause. A customs union called the (+) Zollverein was an important step during this process. The liberal ideas of this movement were at odds with the Concert of Europe, orchestrated by Klaus von (*) Metternich. The revolutions of 1848 called for, for ten points, what cause, advocated for by nationalists at the Frankfurt Parliament, that brought together Bavaria, Prussia, and other states into one country?
Answer: German unification (

2754. In 2003, the Rose Revolution forced this country’s President Eduard Shevardnadze to resign. This country was invaded in 2008 by Russia, who backed its breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, ruining Mikhail Saakashvili’s aspirations to join NATO. For ten points, name this westernmost country of the Caucasus, whose capital is Tbilisi and which is not to be confused with a US state.
Answer: Georgia

2755. This composer celebrated Romanov imperialism with the polonaise that ends his Symphony no. 3, “Polish.” This composer of the Marche Slave used “La Marseillaise” to represent Napoleon’s invading army and also wrote the music to the ballet Swan Lake. For ten points, name this Russian composer who included cannons in his 1812 Overture.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky

2756. In an essay titled The Way of Wealth, this man claimed that “There are no gains without pains,” one of many maxims collected in an annual series that ran from 1732 to 1758 under the name Poor Richard’s Almanac. This man also founded a fire department in Philadelphia and the University of Pennsylvania. For ten points, name this US Founding Father on the $100 bill.
Answer: Benjamin Franklin

2757. Amantani Island is located on this lake and is currently home to thousands of Quechua-­‐speaking peoples. This lake was viewed as sacred by the Incans, and is described as the highest navigable lake in the world. For ten points, name this lake that straddles the Bolivia-­‐Peru border and is the largest lake in South America.
Answer: Lake Titicaca

2758. A 1995 referendum narrowly rejected independence for this province, where a 1970 crisis required the first peacetime use of the War Measures Act after the FLQ kidnapped Pierre Laporte in Montreal. For ten points, name this French-­‐speaking Canadian province.
Answer: Quebec

2759. Many people fled this event on boats whose high passenger mortality rates inspired the nickname “coffin ships.” Robert Peel repealed the Corn Laws to provide relief for those impacted by this event. For ten points, what 1840s disaster was caused by a phytophthora [FI-­‐toe-­‐THO-­‐rah] blight of a certain crop?
Answer: Irish Potato Famine (

2760. After this event, the central figure allegedly said “and yet it moves,” a refusal to accept this event’s result. This event began with the accusation of teaching a “false doctrine” “that the Sun is the center of the world.” The Roman Inquisition carried out, for ten points, what 17th century affair over an Italian astronomer’s heliocentrism?
Answer: the trial of Galileo Galilei (

2761. Two answers required. The League of the Just asked these two people to collaborate on an 1848 pamphlet that opens by stating “a specter is haunting Europe” and studies the history of class struggles. One of these men financially supported the other to do the research for his work known as Das Kapital. For ten points, name these German philosophers, the co-­‐authors of The Communist Manifesto.
Answer: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (

2762. The first Nobel Peace Prize was awarded jointly to pacifist Frederic Passy and the founder of this organization, Henri Dunant, who was inspired after witnessing the carnage of the Battle of Solferino. For ten points, name this Geneva-­‐based international organization that protects victims of war and whose member societies often provide medical services in disaster areas.
Answer: Inter

2763. This man secured power over his rivals, Cimon and Thucydides, through ostracism. This man described the greatness of his city in a celebrated funeral oration and hired Iktinos and Kallikrates to renovate the Acropolis. For ten points, name this leader of the Delian League and statesman of Athens during its Golden Age.
Answer: Pericles BONUS: Pericles died during this first few years of which conflict, which led to the downfall of the Golden Age of Athens after its ultimate defeat by Sparta? Peloponnesian War Page 2

2764. In the 19th century, Karl Budde argued about the number of these entities in the Garden of Eden. One of these entities connected the nine worlds in Norse mythology and was known as Yggdrasil. The Buddha reached enlightenment under, for ten points, what kind of plant that, in the Garden of Eden, represents the knowledge of good and evil?
Answer: trees (

2765. In a 52 BC battle in this region, the attacking side built a wall around a besieged town, then built another wall around themselves. A work written about this region notes that it is “a whole divided into three parts” and describes the author’s victory over Vercingetorix at Alesia. For ten points, name this region that was conquered by Julius Caesar and largely corresponds with modern-­‐day France.
Answer: Gaul (or Gallia) BONUS: René Goscinny and Albert Uderzo created which comic book series

2766. A partisan resistance to the Nazi occupation of this country established a Communist government after the war, led by Josip Tito. The 1992 breakup of this country led to war crimes such as the Srebrenica [sreh-­‐breh-­‐neet-­‐zah] Massacre and the Siege of Sarajevo. For ten points, name this federal Balkan country that included Serbia and Croatia.
Answer: Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia BONUS: Which northernmost former Yugoslav republic, with capital at Ljubljana, provided a major route for refugees to enter Austria during the recent European refugee crisis? Slovenia Page 3

2767. The Convention of Kanagawa was signed during this century, ending a longstanding policy of isolation. The Tokugawa Shogunate was overthrown in this century as part of a restoration of imperial power in Japan. For ten points, name this century in which the Japanese navy purchased the CSS Stonewall four years after the end of the American Civil War.
Answer: 19th century (

2768. This city is the site of an uprising where many of the Friends of the ABC are killed, but Marius Pontmercy is carried to safety from the barricade through this city’s sewers. In another novel set in this city, Claude Frollo is pushed off of a roof and falls to his death after laughing at an execution taking place in the Place de Greve [plass de grev]. For ten points, name this city, the setting of parts of Les Miserables and a cathedral where Quasimodo works as a bell ringer in The Hunchback of Notre Dame.
Answer: Paris BONUS: This author of The Hunchback of Notre Dame depicted the

2769. Tudor queen of England who ruled from 1558 to 1603.
Answer: Elizabeth I (

2770. Iberian country once ruled by the Houses of Braganza and Aviz, including Joao I.
Answer: Portugal

2771. Austrian royal house whose hereditary rule was passed to Maria Theresa via the Pragmatic Sanction.
Answer: House of Habsburg

2772. Last French royal house before the French Revolution.
Answer: House of Bourbon

2773. French royal house founded by Hugh after the end of the Carolingians.
Answer: House of Capet

2774. German house that ruled a namesake state and Britain after the reign of George I.
Answer: House of Hanover Page 5

2775. Nation whose main intelligence agency was the KGB from 1954 to 1991.
Answer: Soviet Union (

2776. European country where Imre Nagy’s [im-­‐reh nazh’s] 1956 revolt was violently crushed by the KGB in Budapest.
Answer: Hungary

2777. American counterpart of the KGB whose leaders have included Allen Dulles.
Answer: Central Intelligence Agency (or CIA)

2778. Country where the KGB could not control Kabul or defeat the mujahideen during a 1980s war.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

2779. Current world leader who once served as a KGB agent.
Answer: Vladimir Putin

2780. Nonviolent Indian independence leader known as Bapu, who was shot by Nathuram Godse in 1948.
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (

2781. British monopoly he protested by marching to the sea at Dandi.
Answer: salt (march)

2782. Unrelated woman who was the first female Prime Minister of India.
Answer: Indira Gandhi

2783. Type of now-­‐banned test she oversaw in 1974, codenamed “Smiling Buddha.”
Answer: nuclear weapons test (

2784. Religious background of the group attacked in that operation, as well as of her bodyguards, who assassinated her after that operation.
Answer: Sikhism

2785. Her son, who succeeded her as Prime Minister and was assassinated himself in 1991.
Answer: Rajiv Gandhi Page 7

2786. While this man recovered from injuries sustained in a strafing raid, he was offered cyanide pills after he was implicated in the Valkyrie (+) assassination plot against Hitler. This general fought an indecisive battle against Bernard Montgomery at El Alamein (*). For ten points, name this “Desert Fox” who commanded Germany’s Afrika Korps.
Answer: Erwin Rommel

2787. During his Great Expedition, this privateer raided St. Augustine. In 1587, this captain raided Cadiz, “singing the beard of the King of (+) Spain,” seven years after a landmark voyage on the Golden Hind (*). For ten points, name this man, the first Englishman to circumnavigate the globe, who was employed by Elizabeth I and fought the Spanish Armada.
Answer: Sir Francis Drake

2788. John McLean and Benjamin Curtis dissented from the majority opinion in this case, citing a lack of opposition to similar provisions in the (+) Northwest Ordinance. The plaintiff of this case sued Irene Emerson, but was found not to have standing to sue for his (*) freedom. For ten points, name this 1857 case in which Roger Taney [taw-­‐nee] declared that African-­‐Americans were not citizens.
Answer: Dred Scott v. Sandford (

2789. The 291 studio focused on this medium under the management of Alfred Stieglitz. This medium was advanced by Louis Daguerre, who names an early form of this medium that reduced the necessary exposure (*) time. For ten points, name this artistic process that Ansel Adams used to portray scenes from American national parks in the 20th century.
Answer: photography (

2790. A speech introducing this religion to the U.S. at the 1893 Parliament of the World's Religions began “sisters and brothers of America” and was given by (+) Swami Vivekananda. A liberation from the birth-­‐rebirth cycle sought in this religion is known as moksha. Opposition to this religion’s (*) Brahmanist caste system led to the development of Jainism and Buddhism. For ten points, name this predominant religion of India.
Answer: Hinduism

2791. This ruler is depicted with Shamash at the top of an Akkadian-­‐language monument that commands, “If a man destroy the (*) eye of another man, they shall destroy his eye.” For ten points, name this Babylonian ruler who wrote an early law code.
Answer: Hammurabi Page 8

2792. At the end of his life, Marcus Aurelius told those around him “weep not for me; think rather” of those affected by one of these disasters. The port of Piraeus [pi-­‐ray-­‐us] is the estimated starting point of one of these disasters that began in (+) 430 BC in Athens. Under Justinian, over 20 million people were killed in one of these that was caused by (*) Yersinia pestis. Bubonic is a type of, for ten points, what type of widely-­‐spreading disease?
Answer: plagues (

2793. Two answers required. The U.S. agreed to end trade relations with one of these two countries if the other would grant safe passage to American merchant vessels by the terms of Macon’s Bill Number Two. The Non-­‐Intercourse Act prevented American trade with these two countries, and commerce between the U.S. and these two European countries virtually ended with the passage of the (*) Embargo Act. For ten points, name these two European powers that vied for American economic support during the Napoleonic Wars.
Answer: England and France (

2794. This cause was the subject of many speeches at the Hambach Festival. The Carlsbad Decrees put an end to fraternities known as burschenschaft that pushed for this cause. A customs union called the (+) Zollverein was an important step during this process. The liberal ideas of this movement were at odds with the Concert of Europe, orchestrated by Klaus von (*) Metternich. The revolutions of 1848 called for, for ten points, what cause, advocated for by nationalists at the Frankfurt Parliament, that brought together Bavaria, Prussia, and other states into one country?
Answer: German unification (

2795. An organization founded by this man gained prominence after publishing the “Collateral Murder” video, along with other materials provided by Chelsea Manning. In 2010, Sweden requested that this man be extradited on allegations of sexual assault. This man was granted asylum by Ecuador in 2012, and currently resides in its London embassy. For ten points, name this whistleblower who founded WikiLeaks.
Answer: Julian (Paul) Assange

2796. During this event, Richard Palmes attacked Thomas Preston with a club, prompting a volley of gunfire that killed Crispus Attucks. John Adams controversially agreed to defend a group of British soldiers accused of murder for their roles in this event. For ten points, name this 1770 killing of five protesters in Massachusetts.
Answer: Boston Massacre (

2797. From Pope Marinus, this man may have received a fragment of the true cross, according to this man’s bishop Asser. He and a rival split the kingdom of Mercia, the eastern half of which joined the kingdom of East Anglia, and this king later rid Wessex of the Danes. For ten points, name this only English monarch to be stylized “the Great.”
Answer: Alfred the Great (or Alfred I)

2798. Physicists often use the “Left step” alternative to this system; another famous alternative was created by Theodor Benfey in a spiral shape. The most recent change to this system included an addition named for the state of Tennessee. This system initially had blank spaces left for “eka-­‐ germanium” and other undiscovered entries. Dmitri Mendeleev introduced, for ten points, what system that organizes the 118 chemical elements?
Answer: periodic table of the elements

2799. In this novel, a woman who seeks vengeance for the murder of her sister by a callous nobleman sews the names of those she marks for death into her knitting. Near the start of this novel, Doctor Manette is released from an eighteen-­‐year sentence in the Bastille. This novel ends as Sydney Carton is guillotined in place of Charles Darnay during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this Charles Dickens novel titled after London and Paris.
Answer: A Tale of Two Cities Page 1

2800. This US president, whose death prompted Dorothy Parker to ask “How can they tell?”, supposedly got his nickname by quipping “You lose” after a woman bet she could “get more than two words out of him.” For ten points, name this US President, known as “Silent Cal,” whose conversational style mimicked his laissez-­‐faire politics of the 1920s.
Answer: Calvin Coolidge (

2801. A leader of this kingdom founded the League of Corinth after crushing the Sacred Band of Thebes at Chaeronea [care-­‐oh-­‐nay-­‐uh]. After a leader of this empire died, its generals feuded in the Wars of the Diadochi [die-­‐ah-­‐doe-­‐kee], which produced the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Seleucid Empire. A leader of this kingdom defeated Darius III at the Battle of Issus. For ten points, name this kingdom led by Philip II and Alexander the Great.
Answer: Kingdom of Macedonia

2802. A type of music native to this country features the five-­‐string vihuela and the deep-­‐bodied, low-­‐ pitched guitarron. A folk song with an uneven five-­‐four rhythm about a legless arthropod became popular during this country’s revolution, with lyrics making fun of Victoriano Huerta sung by partisans of Pancho Villa. For ten points, name this country where songs like “La Cucaracha” and “La Bamba” are played by mariachi bands south of the United States.
Answer: Mexico (or the United Mexican

2803. This event’s lesser known victims include the Batwa pygmy people. The French attempted to alleviate this event through a safe zone in Operation Turquoise. The destruction of an aircraft carrying Juvenal Habyarimana was used as a pretext to begin this event, which ended when Paul Kagame’s [kah-­‐ gah-­‐may’s] Patriotic Front defeated the Interahamwe and recaptured Kigali. For ten points, name this 1994 atrocity in which the Hutus targeted Tutsis in an East African country.
Answer: Rwandan Genocide (

2804. A poem set in this war begins “Half a league, half a league, / Half a league onward, / All in the valley of Death / Rode the six hundred.” This war saw a coalition led by Britain and France defeat Russia on a namesake peninsula Florence Nightingale served as a nurse during, for ten points, what war that provides the setting for Alfred Tennyson’s poem “The Charge of the Light Brigade”?
Answer: Crimean War Page 2

2805. This ruler established the first publicly funded higher-­‐education institution for women, the Smolny Institute. She eliminated required military service for the nobility and placed Stanislas Poniatowski, her former lover, on the throne of Poland in 1763. This ruler assumed power after a coup d’etat against her husband, Peter III. For ten points, name this “Great” Empress of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II) BONUS: Catherine’s scholarly patronage included support for this French playwright and philosopher, the chief editor of the Encyclopedie. Denis Diderot

2806. Bricks of this color were used in the background of the mosaics on the Ishtar Gate to imitate a mineral mined near Sar-­‐i Sang. Tin-­‐glazed pottery of this color over white was produced by artists in 17th century Delft. This color names a period in which works like The Old Guitarist were created by a somber Pablo Picasso. For ten points, name this color that, during the Middle Ages, was produced in artworks by crushing lapis lazuli into pigments like ultramarine.
Answer: blue (

2807. This event took place in its chosen city because the Justizpalast was one of the few undamaged buildings available. Alfred Jodl [yo-­‐del], Hans Frank, and Wilhelm Frick were among those convicted during this event, as was Hermann Goering, who was found dead in his prison cell the day before his scheduled execution. For ten points, name this series of post-­‐World War II military tribunals that convicted former Nazis of war crimes.
Answer: Nuremberg Trials (

2808. A dictator in this nation once bathed in dolphin blood and changed currency to denominations of 45 and 90 units. A leader of this country implemented the order, “when the army shoots, it shoots to hit,” during its 8888 Uprising. Ne Win was deposed in this country, where a national junta put down protests during UN Secretary General U Thant’s funeral. Buddhists are persecuting Rohingya Muslims in, for ten points, what country where Aung San Suu Kyi [chee] is state counsellor?
Answer: Republic of the Union of Myanmar (

2809. ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest producer of this commodity, absorbed a major American company in this industry, Bethlehem, during the 2000s. This commodity’s production was greatly enhanced by the development of the Bessemer process and involves adding carbon to iron. For ten points, name this industrial commodity that created much of Andrew Carnegie’s wealth.
Answer: steel industry

2810. This person married Marina Prusakova during a period of nearly two years that he spent as a factory worker in the Soviet Union. This man shot at and missed Edwin Walker a few months before using the same rifle to fire three shots from the sixth floor of a school book depository in Dallas. For ten points, name this assassin of John F. Kennedy.
Answer: Lee Harvey Oswald

2811. Forces from what is now this country defeated the Mongols at the Battle of Ain Jalut under the command of Baibars, a Mamluk slave soldier. During the Crisis of the Third Century, Zenobia conquered this “breadbasket” region and claimed descent from its most recent independent ruler, a member of the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty who legendarily committed suicide via snakebite. For ten points, name this region once ruled by Cleopatra along the Nile River.
Answer: Egypt

2812. This work ends by criticizing the “false security of peace,” citing Acts chapter 14, verse 22 for the idea that “tribulations” provide passage into heaven. Earlier, this document attacks the “human doctrine” that souls can “[fly] out of purgatory” after the payment of an indulgence; that attack is its 27th point. For ten points, name this document that was posted in Wittenberg in 1517 by Martin Luther, outlining his criticism of the Catholic Church in nearly 100 statements.
Answer: 95 Theses (or Disputation on the Power of Indulgences) BONUS: Though the Theses don’t mention him by name, Luther’s criticism was largely aimed at this German preacher for his sale of indulgences for future sins. Johann Tetzel Third Quarter The categories are ...

2813. Empire that traded with China along the Silk Road, delivering coins and medallions depicting Maximian and Marcus Aurelius.
Answer: Roman Empire (

2814. Animals found on mulberry trees, from which silk was produced in ancient China.
Answer: silkworms (

2815. Empire whose Royal Road, established by Darius the Great, formed part of the Silk Road.
Answer: Persian Empire

2816. Commodity that names the southern branch of the road and whose Oolong and Darjeeling varieties were traded along it.
Answer: tea (

2817. Country where the Karakoram Highway follows the Silk Road to Abbottabad, just west of Islamabad.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

2818. Asian peninsula whose Silla and Goguryeo kingdoms benefited from trade along the road.
Answer: Korean Peninsula

2819. Dynasty in place in China during the beginning of the Roman Empire as the Silk Road began to grow.
Answer: Han

2820. Modern Central Asian country whose city of Samarkand was a major Silk Road stopping point.
Answer: Uzbekistan Page 6

2821. Amphitheater in Rome where the largest gladiatorial games were held.
Answer: Coliseum (or the Flavian Amphitheater)

2822. Horse-­‐drawn vehicles that served as a platform for some gladiators.
Answer: chariots

2823. Social class for many gladiators, especially foreign ones captured as spoils of war.
Answer: slaves (or servus)

2824. Symbol given by spectators to determine whether the winner of a fight should kill or spare the loser.
Answer: a turned thumb (or pollice verso

2825. The type of weapon that a gladius was, from which the word gladiator derives.
Answer: Sword

2826. Type of gladiatorial combat done in a naumachia [now-­‐mock-­‐ee-­‐uh].
Answer: naval battle (

2827. Weapon used by the lightly-­‐armored retiarius against secutores. Either of two English answers is acceptable.
Answer: net and/or trident

2828. Actor who played the title role of Maximus in the film Gladiator.
Answer: Russell Crowe Page 7

2829. Modern capital of Iraq where artifacts were damaged in the Gulf Wars.
Answer: Baghdad

2830. World wonder built in Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar for his homesick wife.
Answer: Hanging Gardens of Babylon

2831. “Fertile” shape of the Mesopotamian region where early civilization grew.
Answer: Fertile Crescent

2832. Important river that meets the Euphrates [yoo-­‐fray-­‐teez] at the Shatt al-­‐Arab in southern Iraq.
Answer: Tigris River

2833. Writing style developed in Mesopotamia, using a stylus to make wedge shapes on tablets.
Answer: cuneiform

2834. Roman Emperor who established Roman control over Mesopotamia before dying in 117 AD.
Answer: Trajan

2835. First urban civilization in Mesopotamia, led during the Uruk Dynasty by Gilgamesh.
Answer: Sumerians

2836. First ruler of Akkad, a “Great” ruler who once served as cupbearer.
Answer: Sargon the Great (or Sargon I) Page 8

2837. During the construction of the Overland Telegraph Line, this site was first explored by Ernest Giles and William Gosse. This site was secured by Bob Hawke in a 99-­‐year lease that controversially allowed it to be (+) climbed by visitors. This site forms a national park along with the Kata Tjuta, a series of formations also called the Olgas. This site was originally named in honor of Henry (*) Ayers. For ten points, name this sandstone formation that is sacred to the Anangu Aboriginal people of Australia’s Northern Territory.
Answer: Uluru (

2838. This general dislodged his opponents from Gaines’s Mill after the wounding of Joseph Johnston at Seven Pines allowed him to take command; that victory was part of this general’s Seven Days Battles against George (+) McClellan. Because this man’s family home stood across the Potomac River overlooking the capital, the government seized it and built (*) Arlington National Cemetery on its grounds. For ten points, name this man who commanded the Army of Northern Virginia and surrendered at Appomattox Court House, ending the Civil War.
Answer: Robert E(dward) Lee

2839. Contrary to popular legend about this composer, audiences actually requested “Immenso Jehova” as an encore, though mourners at this man’s funeral did break out into “Va, pensiero.” That song, the chorus of the (+) Hebrew slaves from this composer’s Nabucco, became an anthem of the (*) Risorgimento, during which this man’s name was used as an acronym in support of King Victor Emmanuel. For ten points, name this 19th-­‐century Italian composer also known for the operas La Traviata and Aida.
Answer: Giuseppe Verdi

2840. This man first rose to prominence when he ambushed an Imagawa army ten times the size of his own. This leader beat his rival Takeda at the Battle of Nagashino, using (+) guns to great effect. After being betrayed by Akechi Mitsuhide, this leader committed suicide at Honno-­‐ji. (*) For ten points, name this first of the Three Great Unifiers of Japan, an ally of Tokugawa Ieyasu and Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
Answer: Oda Nobunaga

2841. A probably forged religious text from this country follows its native god of the underworld, Veles. The restoration of the withershins ritual movement in this country in the 17th-­‐century led to the breaking off of the “Old (+) Believers” here. This nation’s church, which is currently led by Kirill, was reformed in the 17th century by (*) Patriarch Nikon. This country’s capital contains a church known for its colorful “onion” domes. For ten points, name this home of St. Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow.
Answer: Russia (do not

2842. During this battle, the brother of Aeschylus [ess-­‐kuh-­‐luss] was cut down while attempting to pull a ship to shore by hand. Datis and Artaphernes were aided in this battle by a vengeful (+) Hippias, who had been exiled earlier by the winning side. Callimachus cast the deciding vote in favor of launching this battle, which resulted in a rout of (*) Darius’ men. Athens was victorious over Persia in, for ten points, what 490 BC battle that inspires the name of a lengthy footrace?
Answer: Battle of Marathon

2843. An emperor of this dynasty was captured by the Oirat Esen Tayisi in the Tumu Crisis. Li Zicheng of the Shun Dynasty helped cause the downfall of this empire, which was founded by the (+) Hongwu Emperor. This dynasty, which was founded after the Red Turban revolt, was led by the Yongle Emperor, who built the (*) Forbidden City and sponsored several treasure voyages under the eunuch Zheng He. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty that followed the Qing and was known its for blue and white ceramic vases.
Answer: Ming Dynasty

2844. In a speech at the Sorbonne in 1948, this activist outlined her work on a document that describes the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family,” the (+) Universal Declaration of Human Rights. When Marian Anderson was denied a concert at Constitutional Hall by the Daughters of the American Revolution, this woman resigned from the D.A.R. and organized a concert for Anderson at the (*) Lincoln Memorial. For ten points, name this human rights activist who served as First Lady for 12 years alongside her husband, Franklin Delano.
Answer: Eleanor Roosevelt (

2845. This man’s claims may have been embellished with the help of Rustichello, a fellow author. Tradition holds that this man was captured at the Battle of Curzola and thrown into prison, where he began work on his (+) memoirs. This man’s most famous work, the Book of Marvels, notably never mentions tea or walls, despite his supposed friendship with (*) Kublai Khan. For ten points, name this 13th century Venetian merchant who claimed to visit China.
Answer: Marco Polo BONUS: What disease is also known as Hansen’s disease, in honor of the scientist who discovered the bacterium that causes it? Sufferers of this disease were often quarantined on the island of Molokai. leprosy Page 10

2846. An organization founded by this man gained prominence after publishing the “Collateral Murder” video, along with other materials provided by Chelsea Manning. In 2010, Sweden requested that this man be extradited on allegations of sexual assault. This man was granted asylum by Ecuador in 2012, and currently resides in its London embassy. For ten points, name this whistleblower who founded WikiLeaks.
Answer: Julian (Paul) Assange

2847. During this event, Richard Palmes attacked Thomas Preston with a club, prompting a volley of gunfire that killed Crispus Attucks. John Adams controversially agreed to defend a group of British soldiers accused of murder for their roles in this event. For ten points, name this 1770 killing of five protesters in Massachusetts.
Answer: Boston Massacre (

2848. From Pope Marinus, this man may have received a fragment of the true cross, according to this man’s bishop Asser. He and a rival split the kingdom of Mercia, the eastern half of which joined the kingdom of East Anglia, and this king later rid Wessex of the Danes. For ten points, name this only English monarch to be stylized “the Great.”
Answer: Alfred the Great (or Alfred I)

2849. Physicists often use the “Left step” alternative to this system; another famous alternative was created by Theodor Benfey in a spiral shape. The most recent change to this system included an addition named for the state of Tennessee. This system initially had blank spaces left for “eka-­‐ germanium” and other undiscovered entries. Dmitri Mendeleev introduced, for ten points, what system that organizes the 118 chemical elements?
Answer: periodic table of the elements

2850. In this novel, a woman who seeks vengeance for the murder of her sister by a callous nobleman sews the names of those she marks for death into her knitting. Near the start of this novel, Doctor Manette is released from an eighteen-­‐year sentence in the Bastille. This novel ends as Sydney Carton is guillotined in place of Charles Darnay during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this Charles Dickens novel titled after London and Paris.
Answer: A Tale of Two Cities Page 1

2851. After a leader of this empire died, its generals feuded in the Wars of the Diadochi [die-­‐ah-­‐doe-­‐ kee], which produced the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Seleucid Empire. A leader of this kingdom defeated Darius III at the Battle of Issus before winning the Battle of Gaugamela. For ten points, name this kingdom led by Philip II and Alexander the Great.
Answer: Kingdom of Macedonia

2852. A type of music native to this country features the five-­‐string vihuela and the deep-­‐bodied, low-­‐ pitched guitarron. A folk song with an uneven five-­‐four rhythm about a legless arthropod became popular during this country’s revolution, with lyrics making fun of Victoriano Huerta sung by partisans of Pancho Villa. For ten points, name this country where songs like “La Cucaracha” and “La Bamba” are played by mariachi bands south of the United States.
Answer: Mexico (or the United Mexican

2853. This event took place in its chosen city because the Justizpalast was one of the few undamaged buildings available. Alfred Jodl [yo-­‐del], Hans Frank, and Wilhelm Frick were among those convicted during this event, as was Hermann Goering, who was found dead in his prison cell the day before his scheduled execution. For ten points, name this series of post-­‐World War II military tribunals that convicted former Nazis of war crimes.
Answer: Nuremberg Trials Second Quarter

2854. This ruler established the first publicly funded higher-­‐education institution for women, the Smolny Institute. She eliminated required military service for the nobility and placed Stanislas Poniatowski, her former lover, on the throne of Poland in 1763. This ruler assumed power after a coup d’etat against her husband, Peter III. For ten points, name this “Great” Empress of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II) BONUS: Catherine was tsarina of Russia, but grew up speaking which language, which her contemporary Goethe wrote extensively in? German (or Deutsch)

2855. Tin-­‐glazed pottery of this color over white was produced by artists in 17th century Delft. This color names a period in which works like The Old Guitarist were created by a somber Pablo Picasso. For ten points, name this color that, during the Middle Ages, was produced in artworks by crushing lapis lazuli into pigments like ultramarine.
Answer: blue (

2856. A poem set in this war begins “Half a league, half a league, / Half a league onward, / All in the valley of Death / Rode the six hundred.” This war saw a coalition led by Britain and France defeat Russia on a namesake peninsula. Florence Nightingale served as a nurse during, for ten points, what war that provides the setting for Alfred Tennyson’s poem “The Charge of the Light Brigade”?
Answer: Crimean War BONUS: Who was the reigning monarch of England during the Crimean War? Queen Victoria

2857. A dictator in this nation once bathed in dolphin blood and changed currency to denominations of 45 and 90 units. Ne Win was deposed in this country, where a national junta put down protests during UN Secretary General U Thant’s funeral. Buddhists are persecuting Rohingya Muslims in, for the point, what country where Aung San Suu Kyi [chee] is state counsellor?
Answer: Republic of the Union of Myanmar (

2858. ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest producer of this commodity, absorbed a major American company in this industry, Bethlehem, during the 2000s. This commodity’s production was greatly enhanced by the development of the Bessemer process and involves adding carbon to iron. For ten points, name this industrial commodity that created much of Andrew Carnegie’s wealth.
Answer: steel industry BONUS: Andrew Carnegie is closely associated with what city in Western Pennsylvania, home to Carnegie-­‐Mellon University, which is named after him, as well as the Steelers football team? Pittsburgh Page 3

2859. A gun is brandished directly at this person in a Pulitzer-­‐winning photograph by Robert Jackson. This man shot at and missed Edwin Walker a few months before using the same rifle to fire three shots from the sixth floor of a school book depository in Dallas. For ten points, name this assassin of John F. Kennedy.
Answer: Lee Harvey Oswald BONUS: This Dallas nightclub owner shot Oswald, as depicted in the aforementioned photograph. Jack Ruby (or Jacob Rubenstein)

2860. Forces from what is now this country defeated the Mongols at the Battle of Ain Jalut under the command of Baibars, a Mamluk slave soldier. During the Crisis of the Third Century, Zenobia conquered this “breadbasket” region and claimed descent from its most recent independent ruler, a member of the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty who legendarily committed suicide via snakebite. For ten points, name this region once ruled by Cleopatra along the Nile River.
Answer: Egypt BONUS: The Mamluks seized control of Egypt from the Ayyubid dynasty, which was founded by this general who fought in the Third Crusade. Saladin (or Salah ad-­‐Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub)

2861. This work ends by criticizing the “false security of peace,” citing Acts chapter 14, verse 22 for the idea that “tribulations” provide passage into heaven. Earlier, this document attacks the “human doctrine” that souls can “[fly] out of purgatory” after the payment of an indulgence; that attack is its 27th point. For ten points, name this document that was posted in Wittenberg in 1517 by Martin Luther, outlining his criticism of the Catholic Church in nearly 100 statements.
Answer: 95 Theses (or Disputation on the Power of Indulgences) BONUS: The Catholic church was selling indulgences to help finance the construction of which church on the Italian Peninsula? St. Peter’s Basilica Third Quarter The categories are ...

2862. Empire that traded with China along the Silk Road, delivering coins depicting Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius.
Answer: Roman Empire (

2863. Animals found on mulberry trees, from which silk was produced in ancient China.
Answer: silkworms (

2864. Former empire whose Royal Road, established by Darius the Great, formed part of the Silk Road.
Answer: Persian Empire

2865. Commodity that names the southern branch of the road and whose Oolong and Darjeeling varieties were traded along it.
Answer: tea (

2866. Country where the Karakoram Highway follows the Silk Road to Abottabad, just west of Islamabad.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

2867. Asian peninsula whose Silla and Goguryeo kingdoms benefited from trade along the road.
Answer: Korean Peninsula Page 5

2868. Amphitheater in Rome where the largest gladiatorial games were held.
Answer: Coliseum (or the Flavian Amphitheater)

2869. Horse-­‐drawn vehicles that served as a platform for some gladiators.
Answer: chariots

2870. Social class for many gladiators, especially foreign ones captured as spoils of war.
Answer: slaves (or servus)

2871. Sign given by spectators to determine whether the winner of a fight should kill or spare the loser.
Answer: a turned thumb (or pollice verso

2872. Type of gladiatorial combat done in a naumachia [now-­‐mock-­‐ee-­‐uh].
Answer: naval battle (

2873. Special weapon used by the lightly-­‐armored retiarius against secutores. Either of two English answers is acceptable.
Answer: net and/or trident Page 6

2874. Modern capital of Iraq where artifacts were damaged in the Gulf Wars.
Answer: Baghdad

2875. World wonder built in Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar for his homesick wife.
Answer: Hanging Gardens of Babylon

2876. “Fertile” shape of the Mesopotamian region where early civilization grew.
Answer: Fertile Crescent

2877. Important river that meets the Euphrates [yoo-­‐fray-­‐teez] at the Shatt al-­‐Arab in southern Iraq.
Answer: Tigris River

2878. Writing style developed in Mesopotamia, using a stylus to make wedge shapes on tablets.
Answer: cuneiform

2879. First urban civilization in Mesopotamia, led during the Uruk Dynasty by Gilgamesh.
Answer: Sumerians Page 7

2880. This site was secured by Bob Hawke in a 99-­‐year lease that controversially allowed it to be climbed by visitors. This site forms a national park along with the (+) Kata Tjuta, a series of formations also called the Olgas. This site was originally named in honor of Henry (*) Ayers. For ten points, name this sandstone formation that is sacred to the Anangu Aboriginal people of Australia’s Northern Territory.
Answer: Uluru (

2881. This general dislodged his opponents from Gaines’s Mill after the wounding of Joseph Johnston at Seven Pines allowed him to take command; that victory was part of this general’s Seven Days Battles against George (+) McClellan. Because this man’s family home stood across the Potomac River overlooking the capital, the government seized it and built Arlington National Cemetery on its grounds (*). For ten points, name this man who commanded the Army of Northern Virginia and surrendered at Appomattox Court House, ending the Civil War.
Answer: Robert （Edward) Lee

2882. Mourners at this man’s funeral sang “Va, pensiero.” That song, the chorus of the Hebrew slaves from this composer’s opera Nabucco, became an anthem of the(+) Risorgimento, during which this man’s name was used as an acronym in support of King Victor Emmanuel. (*) For ten points, name this 19th-­‐century Italian composer also known for the operas La Traviata and Aida.
Answer: Giuseppe Verdi

2883. This man first rose to prominence when he ambushed an Imagawa army ten times the size of his own. This leader beat his rival Takeda at the Battle of Nagashino, using (+) guns to great effect. After being betrayed by Akechi Mitsuhide, this leader committed suicide at Honno-­‐ji. (*) For ten points, name this first of the Three Great Unifiers of Japan, an ally of Tokugawa Ieyasu and Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
Answer: Oda Nobunaga

2884. The restoration of the withershins ritual movement in this country in the 17th-­‐century led to the breaking off of the “Old Believers” here. This nation’s church, which is currently led by (+) Kirill, was reformed in the 17th century by Patriarch Nikon. This country’s capital contains a church known for its (*) colorful “onion” domes. For ten points, name this home of St. Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow.
Answer: Russia (do not

2885. During this battle, the brother of Aeschylus [ess-­‐kuh-­‐luss] was cut down while attempting to pull a ship to shore by hand. Datis and Artaphernes were aided in this battle by a vengeful (+) Hippias, who had been exiled earlier by the winning side. Callimachus cast the deciding vote in favor of launching this battle, which resulted in a rout of (*) Darius’ men. Athens was victorious over Persia in, for ten points, what 490 BC battle that inspires the name of a lengthy footrace?
Answer: Battle of Marathon

2886. Li Zicheng of the Shun Dynasty helped cause the downfall of this dynasty, which was founded by the Hongwu Emperor. This dynasty, which was founded after the Red Turban revolt, was led by the (+) Yongle Emperor, who built the Forbidden City and sponsored several treasure voyages under the eunuch Zheng He (*). For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty that followed the Qing and was known its for blue and white ceramic vases.
Answer: Ming Dynasty

2887. In a speech at the Sorbonne in 1948, this activist outlined her work on a document that describes the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family,” the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. When (+) Marian Anderson was denied a concert at Constitutional Hall by the Daughters of the American Revolution, this woman resigned from the D.A.R. and organized a concert for Anderson at the Lincoln Memorial (*). For ten points, name this human rights activist who served as First Lady for 12 years alongside her husband, Franklin Delano.
Answer: Eleanor Roosevelt (

2888. This man’s claims may have been embellished with the help of Rustichello, a fellow author. Tradition holds that this man was captured at the Battle of Curzola and thrown into prison, where he began work on his (+) memoirs. This man’s most famous work, the Book of Marvels, notably never mentions tea or walls, despite his supposed friendship with (*) Kublai Khan. For ten points, name this 13th century Venetian merchant who claimed to visit China.
Answer: Marco Polo BONUS: What disease is also known as Hansen’s disease, in honor of the scientist who discovered the bacterium that causes it? Sufferers of this disease were often quarantined on the island of Molokai. leprosy Page 9

2889. Upon taking the throne, this king was read the Declaration of Right by Parliament; that later became part of the English Bill of Rights. This King’s forces defeated James II’s Jacobite uprising at the Battle of the Boyne, after which this Dutch stadtholder assumed power in the Glorious Revolution. For ten points, name this husband of Mary II, a Prince of Orange and 17th century king of England.
Answer: William III of England (or William of Orange

2890. The “massive resistance” movement attempted to circumvent this case’s ruling, which was to be carried out with “all deliberate speed.” Thurgood Marshall argued for the plaintiffs in this case, which struck down Plessy vs. Ferguson. For ten points, name this Supreme Court case that overturned the “separate but equal” principle in public schools.
Answer: Brown vs Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas

2891. A site in this region includes Structure 5B18, also known as El Castillo, a step-­‐pyramid dedicated to Kukulcan, as well as a Great Ball Court. One state in this region has capital at Merida, and cities like Uxmal [oosh-­‐mall] and Chichen Itza are also found in this region. The homeland of the Mayan Civilization was, for ten points, what Mexican peninsula where a meteor impact may have killed the dinosaurs and created the Chicxulub Crater near the Gulf of Mexico?
Answer: Yucatan Peninsula (

2892. This leader hired John Dewey to increase literacy rates by latinizing his country’s alphabet. This man led a national movement that rejected the Treaty of Sevres’ harsh borders and negotiated the Treaty of Lausanne. The “Six Arrows” ideology of secular, democratic reform was developed to replace Ottoman norms by, for ten points, what modernizing first President of Turkey?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

2893. A socialist politician from this country, Emile Vandervelde, argued against its ruler’s personal ownership of a colony investigated by Roger Casement. This country created the Force Publique, an armed force that cut the hands off of enslaved rubber workers in a colony that the Berlin Conference had given to this country’s King Leopold II. For ten points, name this country that once owned the Congo Free State.
Answer: Belgium Page 1

2894. A blindfolded man is tied to a post in a print by this artist titled “Nothing To Be Done,” part of a series called The Disasters of War that shows violent scenes from the Peninsular War. This artist’s painting of Mameluke horsemen in the Puerta del Sol is set one day before another of his works that shows a firing squad aiming at a man in a white shirt outside of Madrid. For ten points, name this Spanish painter of The Third of May, 1808.
Answer: Francisco Goya y Lucientes

2895. Description acceptable. This event was briefly halted when a nearby patrol forced William Dawes to flee; he subsequently fell off his horse and could not finish his mission. This event’s central participant slipped by the Somerset by boat after Robert Newman had placed two lanterns in the Old North Church. Militia were able to prepare to fight at Lexington and Concord thanks to, for ten points, what event in which a Boston silversmith warned of approaching British soldiers?
Answer: Paul Revere’s midnight ride (

2896. This philosopher hypothesized that two constitutional republics will never go to war with each other, an idea described as “Perpetual Peace.” This man popularized the distinction between a priori and a posteriori statements in his 1781 Critique of Pure Reason. The categorical imperative was described by, for ten points, what 18th-­‐century German Enlightenment philosopher?
Answer: Immanuel Kant

2897. After damaging the Ajax, Achilles, and Exeter, the losing side in this battle made the mistake of retreating to Montevideo. Hans Langsdorff decided to scuttle his ship, Graf Spee, rather than continue this battle. For ten points, name this first naval battle of World War II, named for its location in the river that forms the border between Argentina and Uruguay.
Answer: Battle of the River Plate (or Battle of the Rio de La Plata)

2898. This author lays out the foundations for a new Roman constitution is On the Laws, which survives in fragments. After this man’s execution, Fulvia reportedly stabbed his dead tongue with a hairpin to punish him for speaking the Philippics against her husband, Mark Antony. For ten points, name this Roman orator and philosopher who was executed by the Second Triumvirate.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero Page 2

2899. This man’s administration was rattled by revelations that Oakes Ames’s company siphoned funds from the Union Pacific railroad and bribed politicians. This man’s private secretary, Orville Babcock, helped St. Louis distillers create an infamous Whiskey Ring. A widely corrupt administration plagued, for ten points, what 18th US President and former Civil War general?
Answer: Ulysses S. Grant BONUS: Oakes Ames was in charge of this railroad construction company, a shell corporation formed by Union Pacific to assist in fleecing the US government. This company names the ensuing scandal. Credit Mobilier of America (

2900. The Suppression of Communism Act was used to quell protests against this policy. A militant fighter against this policy gave the “I am prepared to die speech” in the Rivonia Trial. Oliver Tambo led Umkhonto we Sizwe [oom-­‐KON-­‐toe we SEES-­‐way] to fight this policy, which was ended by F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela. For ten points, name this policy of racial segregation policy in South Afirca whose name means “separateness.”
Answer: apartheid (

2901. The death of a ruler of this empire at the hands of Tamerlane led to an interregnum ended at the Battle of Camurlu. An Albanian revolt against this empire was led by a former general named Skanderbeg, and this empire defeated a Christian coalition at the Battle of Varna in 1444. Ibrahim the Mad and Murad the Great were sultans of, for ten points, what empire that, under Mehmed II, conquered Constantinople from the Byzantines in 1453?
Answer: Ottoman Empire BONUS: The Ottoman Interregnum began with the death of this Ottoman sultan, called “the Thunderbolt,” and ended with Mehmed I’s aforementioned victory at Camurlu. Bayezid I (or Bayezid the Thunderbolt

2902. These devices, including some installed on Arizona’s Mount Bigelow, were improved after Cold War work on monitoring Soviet satellites inspired the development of adaptive optics. Karl Jansky names a series of 27 of these devices in New Mexico that form a Very Large Array. Isaac Newton invented a form of these devices with reduced aberration; that reflecting type improved on the refracting version, which Galileo used to observe the moons of Jupiter. For ten points, name these astronomical devices.
Answer: telescopes

2903. A king of this nation died at Fredriksten, forcing his men to endure the Carolean Death March to return home. The Pruth River Campaign was waged by Russia against the Ottomans to capture that king of this nation. Another king from this nation was known as the “Lion of the North” and led Protestant forces at the Battle of Breitenfield. The House of Vasa once ruled, for ten points, what country led by Charles XII and Gustavus Adolphus in the Great Northern War and Thirty Years’ War, respectively?
Answer: Kingdom of Sweden BONUS: The aforementioned Pruth River Campaign began after Charles XII’s forces were wiped out at this June

2904. This composer reused a theme from his Gegenliebe in a piece that had to be restarted at its premiere concert, his Choral Fantasy. That concert of this man’s works also featured a five-­‐movement symphony depicting a thunderstorm and a piece whose opening motif was used by the Allies to represent “V for Victory” in World War II. The notes G-­‐G-­‐G-­‐E form the “fate knocking on the door” motif in, for ten points, what German composer’s fifth of nine symphonies?
Answer: Ludwig van Beethoven

2905. The Waldorf-­‐Astoria hotel hosted William Alden Smith’s investigation of this event, an event which he described as an “act of God.” A stray boat containing the bodies of three victims of this event was discovered a month later by the Oceanic. The Carpathia arrived to rescue survivors of this event, but only one-­‐third of its victims could have found room in a lifeboat. For ten points, name this 1912 disaster in which an “unsinkable ship” sank on its maiden voyage.
Answer: sinking of the RMS Titanic BONUS: Among the Titanic’s victims were its architect, Thomas Andrews, and this man, its captain. Edward Smith

2906. These army units were divided into smaller units called maniples and organized into three layers based on experience. After twenty five years of service in one of these units, a veteran was granted citizenship. Each possessed an eagle standard and they were organized into ten separate cohorts, each commanded by a centurion. Thousands of men fought in, for ten points, what largest unit of the Roman army?
Answer: legion BONUS: Entry requirements to the legions were relaxed by this Roman general, a six-­‐time consul and uncle of Julius Caesar. Legionnaires were nicknamed his mules because of the heavy packs he made them wear. Gaius Marius

2907. Country ruled by the Tokugawa Shogunate.
Answer: Japan (or Nippon or Nihon)

2908. Type of infrastructure built throughout the country to allow the “alternate attendance” policy to function, including the “Five Routes.”
Answer: roads (

2909. Capital city of the Tokugawa shoguns.
Answer: Edo (or Tokyo)

2910. City that was the residence of the Emperor during the Tokugawa Era.
Answer: Kyoto

2911. Religious group persecuted by the shogunate after it was spread by European missionaries.
Answer: Christians (or kirishitan

2912. City where, in 1615, Tokugawa forces captured a landmark castle and crushed the Toyotomi clan.
Answer: Osaka (

2913. Series of isolationist laws that closed the country from foreign contact during the Tokugawa era.
Answer: sakoku

2914. Battle in 1600 that marked the beginning of the shogunate, where Ieyasu defeated Ishida Mitsunari’s Western Army.
Answer: Battle of Sekigahara Page 6

2915. Prime Minister Aldo Moro was kidnapped, murdered, and abandoned in Rome.
Answer: Italy (or Italian Republic)

2916. Christian X [the tenth] rode through the streets of Copenhagen during Nazi occupation.
Answer: Denmark

2917. Clement Attlee and the Labour Party created the National Health Service.
Answer: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

2918. Kurt Waldheim was elected President despite lying about his service in the Wehrmacht, which he joined after the Nazis annexed this country.
Answer: Republic of Austria

2919. Erich Honecker advocated “consumer socialism” and Walter Ulbricht’s “New Economic System” ruffled Communist feathers.
Answer: East Germany (or the German Democratic Republic

2920. Nicolae Ceausescu [cho-­‐sess-­‐koo] was overthrown in a 1989 revolution.
Answer: Romania

2921. Rysto Ryti led the nation in the Continuation War against the Soviets.
Answer: Republic of Finland

2922. Ante Pavelic [an-­‐tay pah-­‐veh-­‐lich] established the Ustashe regime within Yugoslavia.
Answer: Independent

2923. Country that lost both Opium Wars to Britain.
Answer: China

2924. Reigning British queen during the 19th century Opium Wars.
Answer: Victoria

2925. European nation that joined Britain during the Second Opium War after the execution of Auguste Chapdelaine [oh-­‐GOOST shap-­‐deh-­‐LAN].
Answer: France

2926. Dynasty in power during the Opium Wars. It fell during the Xinhai [shin-­‐hai] Revolution of 1911.
Answer: Qing [cheeng] Dynasty (do not

2927. City where the unequal treaty ending the First Opium War was signed.
Answer: Treaty of Nanjing

2928. Port city where Commissioner Lin destroyed the opium that started the First Opium War.
Answer: Canton (or Guangzhou)

2929. Waterway, first connected during the Sui Dynasty, that the British blocked during the Opium Wars.
Answer: (Beijing-­‐Hangzhou) Grand Canal

2930. Event that sparked the Second Opium War, when officials seized the namesake merchant ship.
Answer: Arrow incident Page 8

2931. Taksin the Great liberated this nation, which was modernized during the Chakri dynasty by (+) Mongkut. While it was ruled by King Narai of the Ayutthaya Dynasty, the Taungoo Dynasty of Burma invaded this nation, though this Southeast Asian country was (*) never colonized by European powers. Several kings named Rama have ruled, for ten points, what country that was once known as Siam and whose capital is Bangkok?
Answer: Thailand (

2932. Aboriginal leader William Cooper led a march in Melbourne in December 1938, protesting this event, one of the few global protests against it. This event followed the announcement that “spontaneous” demonstrations would not be hampered, made by Joseph (+) Goebbels. Over ten thousand men were taken to Dachau concentration camp after this event, which was a reaction to the death of (*) diplomat Ernst von Rath. For ten points, name this event in Nazi Germany in which thousands of Jewish businesses and synagogues were destroyed.
Answer: Kristallnacht (

2933. During the Civil War, a member of this family served as US Ambassador to the UK. That man, Charles Francis, was the son of a member of this family who was the first US Minister to Russia and negotiated an 1819 treaty over the rights to Florida with Luis de (+) Onis of Spain. That man, James Monroe’s Secretary of State, became the second member of this family to (*) become president. For ten points, name this family of John and John Quincy, the 2nd and 6th US Presidents.
Answer: Adams family

2934. A lecture by this author subtitled “The Monsters and the Critics” argued that Beowulf should be studied as a poem, not as a pseudo-­‐historical work. C.S. Lewis and this writer were leading members of the (+) Inklings, an Oxford literary group. A set of three jewels that are infused with the essence of two trees provide the title of a book by this man that was compiled by his son (*) Christopher, The Silmarillion. For ten points, name this author who created Middle Earth in his Lord of the Rings trilogy.
Answer: J.R.R. Tolkien (or John Ronald Reuel Tolkien) Page 9

2935. This man failed to heed a pardon for trying to overthrow King James I in the Main Plot, which later cost him his life. (+) John White was sent to govern over a “lost colony” this man founded, in which the word (*) “Croatoan” was the only hint of where the settlers disappeared. For ten points, name this founder of Roanoke colony who shares his name with the capital of North Carolina.
Answer: Sir Walter Raleigh

2936. This city’s Al-­‐Azhar Mosque is a leading world center of Sunni Islam, and its Ben Ezra Synagogue was found to hold over 300,000 Jewish manuscript fragments in the 19th century. This city is the official home of (+) Tawadros II, the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church. In 2011, Muslims and Christians protested together in this city’s (*) Tahrir Square on “Martyr’s Sunday” against the government of Hosni Mubarak. For ten points, name this largest Middle Eastern city, the capital of Egypt.
Answer: Cairo

2937. A structure in this city was built with two different shades of white marble and had its construction halted for twenty-­‐five years. That monument stands at the center of a park planned by Pierre (+) L’Enfant, who laid out this city. Maya Lin designed a memorial in this city that consists of a sloping (*) wall of black marble covered in the names of soldiers. For ten points, name this city home to the Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial wall and several Smithsonian museums in the National Mall.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

2938. A British attempt to invade this country was thwarted by Alexandre Petion’s artillery. Yellow fever hurt Charles Leclerc’s attempts to put down a rebellion in this country. After this country gained its independence, Jean-­‐Jacques (+) Dessalines [dess-­‐ah-­‐leen] became governor-­‐general. Napoleon was prompted to sell Louisiana to the United States after losing this modern day country to a (*) slave revolt. Toussaint L’Ouverture’s slave rebellion took place in, for ten points, what country that shares Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic?
Answer: Republic of Haiti Page 10

2939. During this conflict, a navy delayed their retreat because of a lunar eclipse; that decision by Nicias doomed the entire force. After Callicratidas lost at this war’s Battle of Arginusae [ar-­‐ jin-­‐oo-­‐say], (+) Lysander retook command and won at Aegospotami. Alcibiades [alsi-­‐BYE-­‐uh-­‐ dees] defected from one side in this war shortly before the disastrous Sicilian Expedition, then later re-­‐defected to (*) Athens. Thucydides wrote a History of, for ten points, what 5th century BC war that Athens lost to Sparta, named for a Greek peninsula?
Answer: Peloponnesian War (

2940. Upon taking the throne, this king was read the Declaration of Right by Parliament; that later became part of the English Bill of Rights. This King’s forces defeated James II’s Jacobite uprising at the Battle of the Boyne, after which this Dutch stadtholder assumed power in the Glorious Revolution. For ten points, name this husband of Mary II, a Prince of Orange and 17th century king of England.
Answer: William III of England (or William of Orange

2941. The “massive resistance” movement attempted to circumvent this case’s ruling, which was to be carried out with “all deliberate speed.” Thurgood Marshall argued for the plaintiffs in this case, which struck down Plessy vs. Ferguson. For ten points, name this Supreme Court case that overturned the “separate but equal” principle in public schools.
Answer: Brown vs Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas

2942. One state in this region has capital at Merida. Cities like Uxmal [oosh-­‐mall] and Chichen Itza are also found in this region. The homeland of the Mayan Civilization was, for ten points, what Mexican peninsula where a meteor impact may have killed the dinosaurs and created the Chicxulub Crater near the Gulf of Mexico?
Answer: Yucatan Peninsula (

2943. This leader had his country's alphabet latinized and led a national movement that rejected the Treaty of Sevres’ harsh borders. This man then led the negotiation of the ensuing Treaty of Lausanne, signed in 1924. The “Six Arrows” ideology of secular, democratic reform was developed to replace Ottoman norms by, for ten points, what modernizing first President of Turkey?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

2944. A socialist politician from this country, Emile Vandervelde, argued against its ruler’s personal ownership of a colony investigated by Roger Casement. This country created the Force Publique, an armed force that cut the hands off of enslaved rubber workers in a colony that the Berlin Conference had given to this country’s King Leopold II. For ten points, name this country that once owned the Congo Free State.
Answer: Belgium Page 1

2945. This man's series called The Disasters of War shows violent scenes from the Peninsular War. This artist’s painting of Mameluke horsemen in the Puerta del Sol is set one day before another of his works that shows a firing squad aiming at a man in a white shirt outside of Madrid. For ten points, name this Spanish painter of The Third of May, 1808.
Answer: Francisco Goya y Lucientes

2946. This philosopher hypothesized that two constitutional republics will never go to war with each other, an idea described as “Perpetual Peace.” This man popularized the distinction between a priori and a posteriori statements in his 1781 Critique of Pure Reason. The categorical imperative was described by, for ten points, what 18th-­‐century German Enlightenment philosopher?
Answer: Immanuel Kant

2947. This author lays out the foundations for a new Roman constitution in On the Laws, which survives in fragments. After this man’s execution, Fulvia reportedly stabbed his dead tongue with a hairpin to punish him for speaking the Philippics against her husband, Mark Antony. For ten points, name this Roman orator and philosopher who was executed by the Second Triumvirate.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero Second Quarter

2948. This man’s administration was rattled by revelations that Oakes Ames’s company siphoned funds from the Union Pacific railroad and bribed politicians. This man’s private secretary, Orville Babcock, helped St. Louis distillers create an infamous Whiskey Ring. A widely corrupt administration plagued, for ten points, what 18th US President and former Civil War general?
Answer: Ulysses S. Grant BONUS: Oakes Ames was in charge of this railroad construction company, a shell corporation formed by Union Pacific to assist in fleecing the US government. This company names the ensuing scandal. Credit Mobilier of America (

2949. A militant fighter against this policy gave the “I am prepared to die speech” in the Rivonia Trial. Oliver Tambo led Umkhonto we Sizwe [oom-­‐KON-­‐toe we SEES-­‐way] to fight this policy, which was ended by F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela. For ten points, name this policy of racial segregation policy in South Africa whose name means “separateness.”
Answer: apartheid (

2950. An Albanian revolt against this empire was led by a former general named Skanderbeg. This empire defeated a Christian coalition at the Battle of Varna in 1444. Ibrahim the Mad and Murad the Great were sultans of, for ten points, what empire that, under Mehmed II, conquered Constantinople from the Byzantines in 1453?
Answer: Ottoman Empire BONUS: The Ottoman Interregnum began with the death of this Ottoman sultan, called “the Thunderbolt,” and ended with Mehmed I’s aforementioned victory at Camurlu. Bayezid I (or Bayezid the Thunderbolt

2951. Karl Jansky names a series of 27 of these devices in New Mexico that form a Very Large Array. Isaac Newton invented a form of these devices with reduced aberration; that reflecting type improved on the refracting version, which Galileo used to observe the moons of Jupiter. For ten points, name these astronomical devices.
Answer: telescopes BONUS: The Very Large Array of telescopes detect signals in this region of the electromagnetic spectrum. This type of wave was first discovered coming from space by Karl Jansky in

2952. The Pruth River Campaign was waged by Russia against the Ottomans to capture that king of this nation. Another king from this nation was known as the “Lion of the North” and led Protestant forces at the Battle of Breitenfield. The House of Vasa once ruled, for ten points, what country led by Charles XII and Gustavus Adolphus in the Great Northern War and Thirty Years’ War, respectively?
Answer: Kingdom of Sweden BONUS: The aforementioned Pruth River Campaign began after Charles XII’s forces were wiped out at this June

2953. This composer reused a theme from his Gegenliebe in a piece that had to be restarted at its premiere concert, his Choral Fantasy. That concert of this man’s works also featured a five-­‐movement symphony depicting a thunderstorm and a piece whose opening motif was used by the Allies to represent “V for Victory” in World War II. The notes G-­‐G-­‐G-­‐E form the “fate knocking on the door” motif in, for ten points, what German composer’s fifth of nine symphonies?
Answer: Ludwig van Beethoven BONUS: The aforementioned

2954. The Waldorf-­‐Astoria hotel hosted William Alden Smith’s investigation of this event, an event which he described as an “act of God.” A stray boat containing the bodies of three victims of this event was discovered a month later by the Oceanic. The Carpathia arrived to rescue survivors of this event, but only one-­‐third of its victims could have found room in a lifeboat. For ten points, name this 1912 disaster in which an “unsinkable ship” sank on its maiden voyage.
Answer: sinking of the RMS Titanic BONUS: Among the Titanic’s victims were its architect, Thomas Andrews, and this man, its captain. Edward Smith Page 4

2955. These army units were divided into smaller units called maniples and organized into three layers based on experience. After twenty five years of service in one of these units, a veteran was granted citizenship. Each possessed an eagle standard and they were organized into ten separate cohorts, each commanded by a centurion. Thousands of men fought in, for ten points, what largest unit of the Roman army?
Answer: legion BONUS: Entry requirements to the legions were relaxed by this Roman general, a six-­‐time consul and uncle of Julius Caesar. Legionnaires were nicknamed his mules because of the heavy packs he made them wear. Gaius Marius Third Quarter The categories are ...

2956. Country ruled by the Tokugawa Shogunate.
Answer: Japan (or Nippon or Nihon)

2957. Type of infrastructure built throughout the country to allow the “alternate attendance” policy to function, including the “Five Routes.”
Answer: roads (

2958. Capital city of the Tokugawa shoguns.
Answer: Edo (or Tokyo)

2959. City that was the residence of the Emperor during the Tokugawa Era.
Answer: Kyoto

2960. Religious group persecuted by the shogunate after it was spread by European missionaries.
Answer: Christians (or kirishitan

2961. City where, in 1615, Tokugawa forces captured a landmark castle and crushed the Toyotomi clan.
Answer: Osaka (

2962. Prime Minister Aldo Moro was kidnapped, murdered, and abandoned in Rome.
Answer: Italy (or Italian Republic)

2963. Christian X [the tenth] rode through the streets of Copenhagen during Nazi occupation.
Answer: Denmark

2964. Clement Attlee and the Labour Party created the National Health Service.
Answer: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

2965. Kurt Waldheim was elected President despite lying about his service in the Wehrmacht, which he joined after the Nazis annexed this country.
Answer: Republic of Austria

2966. Erich Honecker advocated “consumer socialism” and Walter Ulbricht’s “New Economic System” ruffled Communist feathers.
Answer: East Germany (or the German Democratic Republic

2967. Nicolae Ceausescu [cho-­‐sess-­‐koo] was overthrown in a 1989 revolution.
Answer: Romania Page 7

2968. Country that lost both Opium Wars to Britain.
Answer: China

2969. Reigning British queen during the 19th century Opium Wars.
Answer: Victoria

2970. European nation that joined Britain during the Second Opium War after the execution of Auguste Chapdelaine [oh-­‐GOOST shap-­‐deh-­‐LAN].
Answer: France

2971. Dynasty in power during the Opium Wars. It fell during the Xinhai [shin-­‐hai] Revolution of 1911.
Answer: Qing [cheeng] Dynasty (do not

2972. City where the unequal treaty ending the First Opium War was signed.
Answer: Treaty of Nanjing

2973. Waterway, first connected during the Sui Dynasty, that the British blocked during the Opium Wars.
Answer: (Beijing-­‐Hangzhou) Grand Canal Page 8

2974. Taksin the Great liberated this nation, which was modernized during the Chakri dynasty by Mongkut. While it was ruled by King Narai of the Ayutthaya Dynasty, the Taungoo Dynasty of (+) Burma invaded this nation, though this Southeast Asian country was never colonized by European powers. Several kings named Rama (*) have ruled, for ten points, what country that was once known as Siam and whose capital is Bangkok?
Answer: Thailand (

2975. This event followed the announcement that “spontaneous” demonstrations would not be hampered, made by Joseph Goebbels. Over ten thousand men were taken to Dachau (+) concentration camp after this event, which was a reaction to the death of diplomat Ernst von Rath (*). For ten points, name this event in Nazi Germany in which thousands of Jewish businesses and synagogues were destroyed.
Answer: Kristallnacht (

2976. During the Civil War, a member of this family served as US Ambassador to the UK. That man, Charles Francis, was the son of a member of this family who was the first US Minister to Russia and negotiated an 1819 treaty over the rights to (+) Florida with Luis de Onis of Spain. That man, James Monroe’s Secretary of State, became the second member of this family to (*) become president. For ten points, name this family of John and John Quincy, the 2nd and 6th US Presidents.
Answer: Adams family

2977. C.S. Lewis and this writer were leading members of the Inklings, an Oxford literary group. A set of three jewels created by Feanor, a prince of the Noldor, are infused with the essence of (+) The Two Trees and provide the title of a book by this man that was compiled by his son Christopher, The (*) Silmarillion. For ten points, name this author who created Middle Earth in his Lord of the Rings trilogy.
Answer: J.R.R. Tolkien (or John Ronald Reuel Tolkien)

2978. This man failed to heed a pardon for trying to overthrow King James I in the Main Plot, which later cost him his life. (+) John White was sent to govern over a colony this man founded, in which the word “Croatoan” was the only hint of where the settlers of this (*) “lost colony” had gone. For ten points, name this founder of Roanoke colony who shares his name with the capital of North Carolina.
Answer: Sir Walter Raleigh Page 9

2979. This city is the location of the Al-­‐Azhar Mosque and the Ben Ezra Synagogue. This city is the official home of Tawadros II, the Pope of the (+) Coptic Orthodox Church. In 2011, Muslims and Christians protested together in this city’s Tahrir Square on “Martyr’s Sunday” against the government of (*) Hosni Mubarak. For ten points, name this largest Middle Eastern city, the capital of Egypt.
Answer: Cairo

2980. A structure in this city was built with two different shades of white marble and had its construction halted for twenty-­‐five years. That monument stands at the center of a park planned by Pierre (+) L’Enfant, who laid out this city. Maya Lin designed a memorial in this city that consists of a sloping (*) wall of black marble covered in the names of soldiers. For ten points, name this city home to the Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial wall and several Smithsonian museums in the National Mall.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

2981. A British attempt to invade this country was thwarted by Alexandre Petion’s artillery. Yellow fever hurt Charles Leclerc’s attempts to put down a rebellion in this country. After this country gained its independence, Jean-­‐Jacques (+) Dessalines [dess-­‐ah-­‐leen] became governor-­‐general. Napoleon was prompted to sell Louisiana to the United States after losing this modern day country to a (*) slave revolt. Toussaint L’Ouverture’s slave rebellion took place in, for ten points, what country that shares Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic?
Answer: Republic of Haiti

2982. After Callicratidas lost at this war’s Battle of Arginusae [ar-­‐jin-­‐oo-­‐say], Lysander retook command and won at Aegospotami (+). Alcibiades [alsi-­‐BYE-­‐uh-­‐dees] defected from one side in this war shortly before the disastrous Sicilian Expedition, then later re-­‐defected to (*) Athens. Thucydides wrote a History of, for ten points, what 5th century BC war that Athens lost to Sparta, named for a Greek peninsula?
Answer: Peloponnesian War BONUS: In

2983. The Huolongjing [[HWOH-LOHNG-JING]], or "Fire Dragon Manual," is a book of instructions for creating this material's "poison" and "divine" varieties. While allegedly attempting to create the Elixir of Immortality, alchemists from a certain country invented this chemical compound, which is grouped with the compass, paper, and printing as the Four Great Inventions of China. For the point, name this explosive mixture used to propel projectiles.
Answer: Gunpowder (

2984. This officer was wounded with a bayonet during the Siege of Toulon [[too-LOHN]], shortly before masterminding a plan to capture a string of forts known as "Little Gibraltar." During one conflict, this commander devastated a royalist army by delivering a "whiff of grapeshot." This man's pyrrhic victory at Borodino [[bor-roh-DEE-noh]] led to his occupation of the largely-abandoned city of Moscow. For the point, name this artillery captain-turned-emperor of France.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

2985. A spontaneous example of these languages developed in Nicaragua in the 1980s in the midst of the Sandinista [[san-dih-NEE-stuh]] Revolution. The primate Nim Chimpsky [["CHIMP"-skee]] supposedly learned one of these languages in a study done at Columbia University. Benedictine monk Pedro Ponce de Leon created one of these alphabets to help those who took vows of silence to communicate. For the point, name this type of language often developed for the hearing impaired.
Answer: Sign Language (

2986. This woman’s reign included oversight of a trading expedition to the Land of Punt and the building of the Unfinished Obelisk. Joyce Tyldesley [[TILDS-lee]] hypothesized that this woman’s son and successor, Thutmose III [[TUT-mose "the third"]], contributed to the erasure of this woman’s name from archaeological and written records. For the point, name this fifth ruler of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt, the second confirmed female pharaoh.
Answer: Hatshepsut

2987. This man was commissioned to work on the Manhattan Project, where he helped Hans Bethe [[BEH-tuh]] develop a formula for calculating the yield of a fission bomb. With his colleagues, Julian Schwinger [[SHWING-uh]] and Shinichirō Tomonaga [[shih-nee-CHIH-roh toh-moh-NAH-gah]], this man earned the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to the field of quantum electrodynamics. For the point, name this American physicist, called the "The Great Explainer," who proposed the parton model in particle physics.
Answer: Richard Feynman [["FINE"-man]] (or Richard Phillips Feynman)

2988. Prior to the Battle of Anegawa [[ah-neh-GAH-wah]], this general's sister sent a retreat order to him by way of a sack of beans tied at both ends. In an effort to get this man to embrace his noble obligation, his mentor Hirate Masahide [[hih-RAH-teh mah-suh-HEE-deh]] committed harakiri [[hah- rah-KIH-ree]]. This man utilized the continuous fire of palisade-protected arquebusiers [[ahr-keh- boo-SYEH]] to defeat the Takeda [[tah-KEH-duh]] clan at the Battle of Nagashino [[nah-gah-SHEE- noh]]. The "First Great Unifier" of Japan was, for the point, which daimyo [["DIME"-yoh]] who overthrew the Ashikaga Shogunate [[AH-shee-KAH-gah SHO-"gun"-"ate"]]?
Answer: Oda Nobunaga [[OH-duh noh-boo-NAH-gah]] (

2989. Plutarch compared this man's eloquence to that of Demosthenes [[deh-MOSS-theh-neez]] in his work Parallel Lives. This politician was subject to a proscription endorsed by Mark Antony after he supported Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus [[al-BY-nooss]], who helped organize Julius Caesar's assassination. This Roman politician outed a conspiracy to overthrow the Republic, the pro-Sulla Cataline [[CAT-uh-line]] Conspiracy. For the point, name this 1st century BC orator who delivered the Philippics.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero (

2990. This organization was given the island of Gotland under the promise that they would destroy the Victual Brothers. The disaster of the Battle on the Ice occurred to an autonomous branch of this group, the Livonian Order. Grand Duke Jogaila [[yoh-"GUY"-wah]] and Vytautas [[vee-TOH-tas]] the Great led a combined Polish-Lithuanian force to defeat this order at Grunwald [[GROON-vald]]. A Hochmeister [[HOK-my-stuh]] led, for the point, what German order of holy knights who led the Baltic Crusades?
Answer: Teutonic [[too-TAH-nik]] Order (

2991. This symphony was inspired by a trip to the town with the oldest Czech [["CHECK"]] church in America, Spillville, Iowa. A tape recording of this symphony was taken by Neil Armstrong on the 1969 Apollo 11 mission. A solo melody resembles the African-American spiritual "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" in the first movement of this symphony. For the point, name this symphony inspired by "American" themes, a work of Antonín Dvořák [[duh-VOHR-zhahk]].
Answer: Symphony No. 9 in E Minor, "From the New World" (

2992. During the Normandy invasion, this general brought his cocker spaniels "Hitler" and "Rommel." This man challenged Patton to the "Race to Messina" [[meh-SEE-nuh]] during Operation Husky, losing by a mere few hours. This general prevented an Axis envelopment of his 8th Army at the Battle of Alam el Haifa [[ah-LAHM ell "HIGH"-fuh]] before scoring the first large-scale Allied victory of the war at El Alamein [[ell ah-lah-MEHN]]. For the point, name this British World War Two general.
Answer: Bernard Montgomery (or Bernard Law Montgomery

2993. This dynasty experienced a brief restoration led by Zhang Xun [[ZHAHNG SHUN]] until he was forced to flee to the Legation Quarter. During this dynasty, an attempt to create a Christian theocratic dictatorship occurred during the Taiping [["TIE"-"PING"]] Rebellion. The last ruler of this dynasty, the boy emperor Puyi [[POO-YEE]], was overthrown by Sun Yat-Sen in the Xinhai [[SHIN- "HIGH"]] Revolution. The Ming were overthrown by, for the point, what Chinese dynasty composed of Manchu royals?
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (

2994. This city was home to the author of Dialogue on the Equal or Unequal Sin of Adam and Eve and was also the setting of a play in which Launce and Speed debate the virtues of milkmaids. This home city of the female humanist Isotta Nogarola [[ih-SAH-tuh noh-gah-ROH-luh]] serves as the backdrop of a play in which two rival households, the Montagues [[MOHN-tah-gyoos]] and Capulets [[KAP-yoo- lets]], must deal with a love affair between their children. Shakespeare wrote Two Gentlemen from, for the point, what Italian city, the setting of Romeo and Juliet?
Answer: Verona [[veh-ROH-nah]]

2995. In an effort to invalidate this proposal, a U.S. president recognized the Carranza government as legitimate. A political cartoon depicts a bomb named for this proposal exploding in the hands of Kaiser Wilhelm II. This proposal offered to recover states like California and Arizona, which were lost in the 1848 Treaty of Guadaloupe Hidalgo [[gwah-dah-LOOH-peh hee-DAHL-goh]]. The German Empire attempted to pull the state of Mexico into the Great War with, for the point, what "Note" named for a diplomat?
Answer: Zimmerman Note (or Zimmerman Telegram)

2996. The official report claims this pilot died after an Su-15 jet flew too close to his own MiG-15, forcing him to crash near the Chkalovsky [[chkah-LOF-skee]] Air Base. In reference to this man's accomplishment, Nikita Khrushchev [[KROOS-shoff]] stated [this man] "didn't see anyone up there." This pilot shouted "Off We Go!" shortly before departing from Baikonur [[BY-koh-noor] Cosmodrome on Vostok I [["ONE"]]. The first human in space was, for the point, which Soviet Cosmonaut?
Answer: Yuri Gagarin [[gah-GAH-rin]] (or Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin)

2997. This god, sometimes worshipped as Panoptes [[pan-AHP-teez]], informs Demeter of the abduction of Persephone [[per-SEH-foh-nee]] by Hades. Julian the Apostate [[uh-PAH-"state"]] wrote a "Hymn to [this deity]," describing his conversion from Christianity to the worship of this god. This son of Hyperion, who was sometimes syncretized with Apollo, supposedly drove a golden chariot across the heavens. The Colossus of Rhodes depicted, for the point, what personification of the Sun from Greek mythology?
Answer: Helios (or Sol)

2998. During these wars' Battle of Bizani [[bih-ZAH-nee]], the first combat biplane was shot down while being flown by a volunteer Russian pilot. During these wars, Eleftherios Venizelos [[el-eff- THEHR-yohs veh-nee-ZEH-lohs]] pulled rank on King Constantine I to force a march on Thessalonica [[thess-uh-LOH-nee-kuh]]. The first of these wars concluded with the Treaty of London, resulting in Enver Pasha giving up most of the Ottoman territory in Europe. Bulgaria lost much of its territory in the second of, for the point, which wars named for a peninsula in southeastern Europe?
Answer: Balkan Wars (

2999. The introduction of the eunuch-magistrate is attributed to a queen of this empire named Semiramis [[seh-mih-RAHM-iss]]. An early use of the casus belli [[kah-SOOSS "BELL"-"eye"]], or "justification of war," is found in the annals of this empire's Tiglath-Pileser I [[TIG-lath pie-LEE-ser "the first"]]. The subjugation of the Kingdom of Judah and the destruction of the rival city of Babylon is attributed to King Sennacherib [[seh-NAH-keh-rib] of this empire. For the point, name this Mesopotamian empire named for its capital city of Assur.
Answer: Assyrian Empire (or Neo-Assyrian)

3000. The first four of these events were named after the village of Stoke Mandeville in the UK, while a similar version of these events was held in Örnsköldsvik ["urn"-SHURLDS-veek] in 1976. A 2016 Nature article detailed the advantages of running counterclockwise in these events. The 2000 edition of these events was plagued by a Spanish team's cheating during a Basketball ID tournament. For the point, name these games held after the Olympics that feature athletes with disabilities.
Answer: Paralympics (or Paralympic Games

3001. This proposal asserted the need for free passage through the Dardanelles [[dar-dah-NELLS]] as well as the creation of an independent Poland. The last part of this proposal suggested the need for an international body to guarantee territorial integrity. This proposal led to the creation of the League of Nations, although the United States never joined. For the point, name this multi-part proposal by Woodrow Wilson arguing for national self-determination following World War One.
Answer: The Fourteen Points

3002. Mosul along with his brother. That member of this family earlier put down Shiite [[SHEE-ite]] uprisings with his Republican Guard in the 1990s. A patriarch of this family led a branch of the Ba'ath [[buh-AHTH]] party and in the Al-Anfal Campaign used chemical weapons against the Kurds. The invasion of Kuwait and Iran was done by a member of, for the point, what family, led by Saddam [[sah-DAHM]]?
Answer: Hussein [[hoo-SEHN]] (

3003. During a snowstorm power outage, a suburb of this city named Boucherville [[boo-shehr- VEEL]] intentionally derailed a diesel train and used it as an emergency generator. This city experienced the Murray-Hill riots after worker conditions became unsafe due to bombs being planted by the FLQ. A visit by Charles de Gaulle [[SHARL deh GAHL]] to this city in 1967 infamously led him to proclaim, "Vive le Quebec Libre" [[VEEV luh keh-BEK LEE-bruh]] while at this city's World Exposition. For the point, name this largest Francophone city in Canada.
Answer: Montréal [[mon-TREH-ahl]]

3004. Arab polymath al-Kindi [[KIN-dee]] introduced the use of this good as a general anesthetic, and Emperor Jahangir's [[jah-HAHN-"gears"]] consumption of wine and this drug made him an incapable ruler. Ending a war named for this good, the Treaty of Nanking created the five treaty ports and gave away the island of Hong Kong. China lost multiple 19th-century wars to the British named for, for the point, what narcotic, often found in "poppy" form, which is used to create heroin?
Answer: Opium poppy (

3005. The Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act gave this institution the designation of "super-regulator." A head of this institution caused a namesake "Put" due to his monetary policy, leading to Wall Street investors overusing "Repurchase Agreements" and contributing to the real estate mortgage bubble of the 1990s and 2000s. That head of this institution, Alan Greenspan, was succeeded in 2006 by Ben Bernanke. For the point, name this Central Banking system of the United States.
Answer: The Federal Reserve System (

3006. Wealthy merchant Emon Saburo [[eh-MON sah-BOO-roh]] broke the bowl of a man in this profession named Kukai [[koo-KYE]], leading to the merchant's eight sons simultaneously falling ill and dying. Li Jong [[LEE JONG]] of the Chan [[CHAHN]] school held this occupation, though he was known for intentionally ignoring its rules by drinking alcohol to excess and eating meat. Often depicted meditating in Zen gardens, for the point, what clerical occupation is prominent in Buddhism?
Answer: Buddhist Monk (

3007. The Shower Posse, named for their "showering" of politicians with bribes, is a drug cartel aligned with this nation's conservative Labour Party. Enslaved Akans [[ak-KAHNS]] nearly wrested control of this island nation during Tacky's War. The Treaty of Madrid transferred this modern nation to England from Spain, after which this country was unofficially governed from Port Royal. The Maroon Wars occurred in, for the point, what Caribbean island nation?
Answer: Jamaica (or Jumieka)

3008. A gift containing this animal's dung sent to Emperor Lê Thánh Tông [[LEH TAHN TONG]] precipitated a failed invasion of Lan Xang [[LAHN SHAHNG]]. Over 500 of these animals entered the stables of Seleucus [[seh-LOO-kus]] I after his daughter married Chandragupta Maurya [[CHAHN- drah-GOOP-tuh MAHR-yah]]. The majority of these animals used to cross the Alps during the Second Punic [[PYOO-nik]] War were lost by Hannibal. For the point, name these large land mammals which saw heavy use in the kingdoms of Southeast Asia and India.
Answer: Elephants (

3009. A statue of a skeptical poet who wrote The Epistle of Forgiveness in this language was beheaded in the midst of the Syrian Civil War. The denouncement of scholars like Alpharabius [[al- fah-RAHB-yus]] occurs in The Incoherence of the Philosophers by Al-Ghazali [[al-guh-ZAH-lee]], who wrote in this language. "The Seven Voyages of Sinbad" and "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves" appear in A Thousand and One Nights, written in this tongue. For the point, name this Semitic language also used for the Quran [[kuh-RAHN]].
Answer: Arabic (or Arabiy [[ah-rah-BEE]])

3010. This nation's presidency is named for the god of justice, Forseti. The Allies occupied this country when its sovereign was invaded in Operation Weser [[VEH-suh]] Exercise. This nation disputed fishing rights with the UK in the Cod Wars, and with the blessing of Christian X [[the tenth]], a plebiscite in this island nation decided to break away from Denmark. Sveinn Björnsson [[SVAYN BYORN-son]] served as the first head of state of, for the point, what Nordic island nation?
Answer: Republic of Iceland (or Lydveldid Ísland [[EEZ-lahnd]])

3011. Near the waters of this river, the British incapacitated German-controlled drydocks during the St. Nazaire [[sehn nah-ZARE]] Raid to prevent the Bismarck from being repaired. During the War of the Vendee [[vahn-DEH]], Jean-Baptiste Carrier [[kahr-YEH]] mass-drowned monarchists from Nantes [[NONT]] in this river. The 17th-century Briare [[bree-AHR]] Canal connects this river to the Seine [[SEHN]]. The longest river in France is, for the point, what body of water which crosses into Orleans [[ohr-leh-AHN]] and Nevers [[neh-VEHR] as it flows to the Atlantic?
Answer: Loire [[LWAHR]] River (

3012. A statue titled Discovery of America was removed from this building in 1958 due to it depicting Christopher Columbus towering over a cowering native woman. This building's namesake "Rotunda" houses the original Surrender of General Cornwallis by John Trumbull. Charles Bulfinch designed this government building's dome, on which the fresco The Apotheosis of Washington is painted. The Senate and House of Representatives chambers are in, for the point, what Washington, D.C. building?
Answer: United

3013. This man's chief lieutenant was a former African chieftain named Black Caesar, who previously ran a slave camp in the Upper Florida Keys. This man's ship, which was once a merchant vessel named the Concord, was renamed in reference to the last Stuart monarch. This man died off the coast of North Carolina in 1719 after having been run aground by the HMS Bedford. For the point, name this pirate, whose real name was Edward Teach, the captain of the Queen Anne's Revenge.
Answer: Blackbeard (

3014. An armored corps from this nation known as the "Black Division" was tasked with breaking the Nazi defense at the Falaise [[fah-LAYZ]] Gap. A team of mathematicians from this nation worked on breaking the German Enigma machine cipher led by Marian Rejewski. The majority of death camps, including Treblinka and Auschwitz, were located in this occupied nation. The September 1, 1939 Nazi invasion of, for the point, what nation ushered in the Second World War?
Answer: Republic of Poland (or Rzeczpospolita Polska

3015. On the first day of this battle, John Buford spread his defenses around Herr Ridge, McPherson Ridge, and Seminary Ridge, anticipating the arrival of the Confederate army. This battle, which saw fierce fighting at Little Round Top, was lost for one side following the failed Pickett’s Charge. For the point, name this U.S. Civil War battle fought over three days in 1863 in and around a namesake town in Pennsylvania.
Answer: Battle of Gettysburg

3016. A revolt of this force burned the Scutari Barracks due to reforms known as Nizam-I Cedid [[NEE-zahm-EE seh-DEED]], or the "New Order." In a modernization effort, this force was disbanded following the Auspicious Incident by Mahmud II. The devshirme system originally recruited young, Christian boys into this military corps, which was tasked with protecting the sultan in battle. For the point, name this elite, musket-wielding corps of Ottoman infantry.
Answer: Janissaries (or Janissary Corps

3017. This man used the cousin of Amerigo Vespucci [[veh-SPOO-chee]], Simonetta, as the model for the title nymph in The Death of Procris. Cosimo, Piero, and a young Lorenzo D' Medici all appear in this man's artwork Adoration of the Magi. This man became a fervent member of the "Weepers," followers of Friar Savonarola [[sah-voh-nah-ROH-lah]], and willingly destroyed several of his own works of art. For the point, name this artist of The Birth of Venus and Primavera.
Answer: Sandro Botticelli (or Alessandro di Mariano di Vanni Filipepi)

3018. During this period, the heretical sect of self-whipping acolytes known as the "Flagellants" peaked in popularity. One theory states this period began after Hanseatic contacts in the fur trade travelled to the Republic of Novgorod. Under Casimir the Great, the effects of this period were lessened in Poland, because the Jewish community spread hygienic practices like handwashing. Up to half of Europe's population was killed by, for the point, what 14th century blight?
Answer: Black Death (

3019. In a Kalidasa play in this language, the celestial nypmh Urvasi is turned into a vine. The likely- fictional Kaurava and Pandava families battle in the dynastic Kurukshetra [[koo-rook-SHEH-trah]] War in an epic poem in this tongue. A subset of this language, which arose in the late Bronze Age, is known for its use in the Vedas. The Ramayana and Mahabharata were written in, for the point, what ancient sacred language of the Indian subcontinent?
Answer: Sanskrit (

3020. Under the dictator Siad Barre [[bah-REH]], this nation's forces targeted the Issaq [[EE-sahk]] clan in the Hargeisa [[har-GAY-suh]] Genocide. During a 1990s civil war in this nation, the Garoowe [[gah-ROO-way]] Conference led to the founding of the splinter state of Puntland. The collapse of this state led to an increase in international piracy in the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. The Battle of Mogadishu occurred in, for the point, what nation on the Horn of Africa?
Answer: Republic of Somalia (or Jamhuuriyadda Federaalkaa Soomaaliya

3021. Using the numeri auxiliary system, this general introduced Eastern mounted archers and cataphracts into the Legion. This proponent of "Strength through Peace" rebuilt the Pantheon following its partial destruction during a 114 fire. This man accepted Antoninus Pius as his successor on the condition that he appoint Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus as his heirs. A wall crossing Roman Britain was built by, for the point, which of the "Five Good Emperors"?
Answer: Hadrian (

3022. This man openly condemned a past administration's 1961 crackdown on Algerian citizens under police chief Maurice Papon [[pah-POHN]]. This man's foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian [[zhon-EEV luh dree-AHN]] called the signing of the AUKUS pact a "stab in the back." This successor of Francoise Hollande [[oh-LAHND]] defeated Marine Le Pen [[luh-PAHN]] in a 2017 electoral run- off. The Yellow-Vest protests occurred during the administration of, for the point, which French president?
Answer: Emmanuel Macron (or Emmanuel Jean-Michel Frédéric Macron)

3023. This man's forces met disaster against Marinid sultan Salah ibn Salah at the 1437 Battle of Tangiers, after which this man's brother, Ferdinand, was given as a hostage. This royal supposedly based his efforts out of a villa on the Sagres [[SAH-greesh]] peninsula, from which he funded several caravel voyages to the Bay of Arguin [[ahr-GEEN]], Madeira [[muh-DEEH-ruh]], and the Azores [[uh- ZORZ]]. For the point, name this fifteenth-century Portuguese prince, often credited with jumpstarting the Age of Exploration.
Answer: Prince Henry the Navigator (or Infante Dom Henrique, o Navegador; or Infante Dom Henrique [note: in Portuguese, "the Navigator" title is not typically attached to Henry's name])

3024. Shortly before this operation, Prime Minister Paul Reynaud [[ray-NOH]] declared Leopold III a "traitor" for surrendering after the Battle of the Lys [[LEESS]]. The Ministry of Shipping scoured the River Thames for private naval vessels to lease, later becoming known as the "Little Ships of" this operation. Winston Churchill's "We Shall Fight on the Beaches" speech called this military operation a "Miracle of Deliverance." For the point, name this "evacuation" of 300,000 Allied soldiers shortly before the Fall of France.
Answer: Dunkirk Evacuation (

3025. Protostrator Manuel Kamytzes [[kam-ITE-zeez]] harassed soldiers en route to this war while they were unable to cross from Thrace into Anatolia. During this war, the weight of his horse's armor led to the drowning of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa while crossing the Saleph [[SAH-leff]] River. Following this war's Battle of Jaffa [[JAH-fah]], Richard the Lionheart and Saladin agreed to peaceful terms. For the point, name this 12th century "Crusade" prompted by the Saracen [[SAY-ruh-sen]] capture of Jerusalem.
Answer: Third Crusade (

3026. It's not Afghanistan, but mujahideen [[moo-jah-hih-DEEN]] guerillas in this nation's Mayu Peninsula agitated for the right to be annexed by a western neighbor. Mao's support of the "Red Flags" in this nation led to its president, Ne Win, cutting off relations with China. This nation's Tatmadaw [[TAT-mad-aw]] armed forces overthrew the government of Aung San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] in 2021. The repression of the Rohingya [[row-HIN-gah]] people occurred in, for the point, what nation also known as Burma?
Answer: Myanmar (

3027. Plumber Max Hödel [[HUH-del]] attempted to kill a monarch with this name after he was expelled from the Social Democratic Party. The second ruler of this name from the House of Hohenzollern became a figurehead in the final years of his reign, conceding power to Erich Ludendorff and Paul von Hindenburg. That monarch of this name dismissed longtime chancellor Otto von Bismarck two years into his reign. The Kaiser at the beginning of World War One had, for the point, what regnal given name?
Answer: Kaiser Wilhelm (

3028. Mining rights for this substance led to a conflict between the Duke of Ferrara [[fer-RAH-rah]] and Pope Sixtus IV in a 15th-century conflict named for it. France's acquisitions from the Albigensian [[al-beh-JEN-zee-un]] Crusade led to the establishment of a crown tax named the gabelle on this substance. The Song dynasty perfected large, artificial evaporation ponds for extracting this substance. The land word salary may be derived from, for the point, what mineral used to preserve food?
Answer: Salt (

3029. A princess and a warrior from this culture were supposedly transfigured into the stratovolcanoes Popocatepl [[poh-poh-kah-TEH-pill]] and Iztaccihuatl [[ees-stah-keh-HWAH-til]]. Known as the "hand-made mountain," the abandoned Great Pyramid of Cholula was a pilgrimage site for these people. Within the "Sacred Precinct" of these people was the Templo Mayor complex, which was simultaneously dedicated to Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-zee-loh-POACH-tlee]] and Tlaloc. For the point, name this Mesoamerican people who worshiped Quetzalcoatl [[KWEH-tsuhl-KWAH-tul]] and built Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohtch-TEET-lahn]].
Answer: Aztec (

3030. This monarch's sister Berenice [[beh-reh-NEE-kay]] IV died at the hands of her father after he paid Aulus Gabinius [[OW-looss gah-BIH-nee-ooss]] to reclaim his throne. While visiting a Triumvir in Cilicia, this ruler dressed as a nude Aphrodite on a golden barge sailing down the Cydnus [[SID-nooss]] river. This mother of Caesarion supposedly killed herself with asps before being captured by Octavian. For the point, name this last Ptolemaic ruler, a queen of Egypt and paramour of Mark Antony.
Answer: Cleopatra VII Philopator

3031. The first Japanese people to visit this kingdom was the crew of the Inawaka-maru, who broke isolationist policy. Sanford Dole's provisional government succeeded this kingdom, nearly going to war with the U.S. during Black Week after planters refused to reinstate Queen Liliʻuokalani [[leh-LEE- oh-kah-LAH-nee]]. Kamehameha [[kah-MEH-hah-MEH-hah]] the Great's conquests of islands including Molokaʻi and Oahu formed, for the point, what Polynesian kingdom that was annexed into the United States?
Answer: Kingdom of Hawaii (or Hawaiian Kingdom

3032. This man openly decried the Social Democratic Party's plan to align with the Lassalleans in the "Gotha Program." While critiquing Hegel's Philosophy of Right, this thinker called faith the "Opium of the Masses." This thinker's text Theories of Surplus Value was published by his frequent collaborator, Friedrich Engels, after this man's death. Capital and The Communist Manifesto were written by, for the point, which influential 19th-century German thinker?
Answer: Karl Marx (or Karl Heinrich Marx)

3033. During this war, the carrier Oriskany nearly sank after a soldier accidentally lit a flare and threw it in a locker, causing a fire that killed 44 sailors. During this conflict, naval trawlers attempted to drop supplies to sites along the Bồ Đề [[BOH-DEH]] River including Nha Trang to get past U.S. personnel. Operation Custom Tailor was a dedicated naval bombardment of Haiphong Harbor during this war. For the point, name this 1955-1975 Southeast Asian conflict?
Answer: Vietnam War (or Chiến tranh Việt Nam)

3034. In this nation, the housewife Mary Jackson used Belvidere Baptist Church to organize a bread riot in its capital city. John Pool led the Red Strings society, aiming to peacefully end a war fought by this breakaway state and return to its mother nation. This state believed "King Cotton" would pull the UK into the war on their side. The surrender at Appomattox Courthouse nominally ended, for the point, what state, which fought the Union in the U.S. Civil War?
Answer: The Confederacy (

3035. In this state, editor John Peter Zenger successfully won a libel case brought on by this state's sitting colonial governor. Later converted into a silverware company, the utopian "Oneida [[oh-NYE- duh]] Community" in this state attempted to create Jesus's Millennial Kingdom on earth. This state's largest city was the headquarters for the British during the American Revolution following the Battle of Long Island. The Albany Congress occurred in, for the point, what Mid-Atlantic state?
Answer: New York

3036. Plasma torch gasification may be applied to this general type of material to prevent methane pollution and has been added to the U.S. Navy's Gerald R. Ford class aircraft carriers. The company Bigbelly produces a solar-powered machine that compacts this material. Accumulation of this material in oceanic gyres [[JIRES]] creates namesake patches, including one named the "Great Pacific." For the point, name this material stored in landfills.
Answer: Garbage (or trash, or waste, or refuse, or rubbish

3037. Human settlement of this country likely originated with Austronesians sailing on outrigger canoes from what is now Indonesia. Following the Franco-Hova War in this nation, Queen Ranavalona III granted the port of Diego-Suarez and the surrounding bay to France. Radama I encouraged the modernization of this nation's Malagasy [[mah-lah-GAY-see]] language by using the Latin alphabet. Lemurs are endemic to, for the point, what African island nation and former French colony?
Answer: Republic of Madagascar (Repoblikan'i Madagasikara)

3038. While extracting this commodity, peasants developed the Yangge [[YAHNG-GUH]] style of folk song during the Song Dynasty. A Taoist state ruled by the "Celestial Masters" during the Three Kingdoms period required that adherents donate "Five Pecks" of this commodity. In legend, Guan Yin gave this food to the Chinese people to end their starvation. Paddies are used to grow, for the point, what chief grain of East Asia?
Answer: Rice (

3039. This man's illegitimate son, William, served as the final colonial governor of New Jersey. This man organized the militia which halted the marauding Paxton Boys's march on Philadelphia. This diplomat, who secured French intervention in the American Revolution, also invented conventional bifocals. For the point, name this American Renaissance man and Founding Father who served as the United States's first Postmaster General.
Answer: Benjamin Franklin

3040. This nation's Almirante Brown Antarctica base was burned down by a scientist after he was ordered to stay the winter. This country's National Reorganization Process led to a period of state terrorism known as "La Guerra Sucia" [[soo-SEE-ah]], or the Dirty War. The "Shirtless Ones" dominated post-war politics of this nation under the leadership of Juan Perón. Perón ruled from Buenos Aires in, for the point, what South American nation?
Answer: Argentina (

3041. During the August Movement, this figure gave the "Do or Die" speech, advocating for an end to violent resistance during the Second World War. American vice-consul Herbert Reiner captured this man's assassin following an attack at the Birla House. The British Raj's taxes on a certain good led to this man organizing the Salt March to Dandi. The term Mahatma was bestowed upon, for the point, which Indian freedom fighter?
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (

3042. Composer Charles Hubert Parry wrote one of these works at the behest of British Poet Laureate Robert Bridges to strengthen wartime resolve during World War One. One theory claims that the composition of one of these works began as Martin Luther entered the Diet of Worms [[DEE- et "of" VURMS]] in 1521. That work of this type is "A Mighty Fortress is Our God." The biblical Book of Psalms is a collection of these songs supposedly written by King David. For the point, name these religious songs written in adoration of God.
Answer: Hymns (

3043. It's not Bangkok, but the Dusit Thani [[DOO-sit TAH-nee]] building in this city is meant to represent hands performing a traditional Thai greeting. This city’s man-made archipelago known as “The World” remains largely undeveloped due to the 2008 financial crisis. In 2009, this city became home to the largest building in the world, the Burj Khalifa. For the point, identify this city, the namesake of one of the seven emirates that make up the UAE.
Answer: Dubai (or Dubayy)

3044. One of these structures named for Emperor Domitian inspired the Statius [[STAY-shee-us]] poem The Elements of Balance. The Quattuorviri [[KWAH-twohr-VEE-ree]] was a quartet of magistrates appointed by the Republic who oversaw the maintenance of these structures. The cursus publicus was a courier system under Augustus which used these constructs to quickly deliver mail. Rome and Brundisium were connected by, for the point, what type of construct known as the Via Appia?
Answer: Roads (

3045. An early musical component added to this genre by Afro-Creole musician "Jelly Roll" Morton was known as the "Spanish Tinge." Ornette Coleman was an early pioneer of this genre's "Free" form, releasing The Shape of [this genre] to Come in the late 1950s. The interwar years in the United States are sometimes known as "The Age of" this musical style. For the point, name this improvisational genre of music whose practitioners include Miles Davis and Duke Ellington.
Answer: Jazz (

3046. This monarch names the North American theatre of the Nine Years' War, a conflict ended by the 1701 Treaty of Ryswick. The Immortal Seven sent a request to this stadtholder to seize control of one kingdom. The Jacobites, who sought to restore James II, were defeated by this man's army at the Battle of the Boyne. The husband of Queen Mary was, for the point, which Dutch nobleman from the House of Orange who was bestowed the English throne during the Glorious Revolution?
Answer: William of Orange (

3047. This building was wrapped in silver fabric by the artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude in commemoration of one nation's reunification. Marinus van der Lubbe [[LOO-buh]] set fire to this building, leading to a "Decree" effectively banning the Communist Party. Yevgeny Khaldei [[KAHL- day]] photographed a Red Army soldier hoisting the Soviet flag above this building during the Battle of Berlin. For the point, name this German parliamentary building which today houses the Bundestag [[BOON-deh-shtahg]].
Answer: Reichstag [[RIKE-shtahg]] (

3048. Under this fixture is a chapel dedicated to the patron saint of one nation, Our Lady Revealed, who supposedly appeared before three fishermen near the Paraiba [[pah-RYE-bah]] river. This figure, built to combat “an advancing tide of Godlessness,” had much of its funding raised through the Semana do Monumento. This Philipp Landowski-designed statue sits atop Corcovado Mountain. For the point, name this massive statue of Jesus in Rio de Janeiro.
Answer: Christ the Redeemer (or Cristo Redentor)

3049. The Naryshkin family supported this ruler at a young age, stopping his sister-regent Sophia from usurping power from him. This man's reign was followed by the so-called "half-tsar," Alexander Menshikov, who dominated the reign of Catherine I. His tall stature and thick accent led to this tsar being easily recognized during his incognito "Grand Embassy" of Europe. The Empire of Russia was modernized by, for the point, what "Great" tsar?
Answer: Peter I (or Peter the Great

3050. While the first published mention of these natural formations was by Pedro Cieza de León, these formations were not studied until Paul Kosok re-discovered them. When Greenpeace set up a banner at the site of these natural formations, they were accused of inadvertently damaging them. These landmarks are located near a namesake tectonic plate south of Lima. Designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, for the point, what group of very large geoglyphs are located in a namesake desert in southern Peru?
Answer: Nazca Lines (

3051. This politician's namesake "Doctrine" allowed for Middle Eastern nations to directly request American military and financial aid. This president's Farewell Address warned of the growing Military-Industrial Complex and large-scale deficit spending. This man's time in occupied Germany and visit to the Autobahn inspired his promotion of the Interstate Highway System. For the point, name this general-turned-president in the 1950s, nicknamed "Ike."
Answer: Dwight D(avid) "Ike" Eisenhower

3052. A self-taught weapon designer from this nation, Aimo Lahti, created the anti-tank "Elephant Gun," though it proved unable to penetrate T-34s. To prevent the USSR from using radio-controlled explosives, this nation's military played four months of non-stop polka during the Continuation War. This nation built a ring of fortifications known as the Mannerheim Line to defend the Karelian Isthmus. The Winter War was fought against the Soviets by, for the point, what Scandinavian nation?
Answer: Republic of Finland (or Suomen tasavalta

3053. In this year, much of the Jewish population of Granada was massacred following a plan by the Jewish vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela to betray the city to a rival taifa [[tah-EE-fah]]. In this year, the Earl of Orkney provided shelter to the Norwegians following the loss at Stamford Bridge and death of Harald Hardrada at the hands of Harold Godwinson. The Battle of Hastings led to William the Conqueror seizing the English throne in, for the point, what year?
Answer: 1066

3054. 2007 riots in this city resulted from Muslim Imams calling for the death of writer Taslima Nasrin. Outside this city in the suburb of Barrackpore, the sepoy Mangal Pandey openly declared he would rebel against the British Raj due to the use of pig fat to grease cartridges. In this city, the Nawab of Bengal supposedly stuffed 140 prisoners of war in the tiny dungeon of Fort William. The Hooghly River runs through, for the point, what East Indian city with an infamous "Black Hole"?
Answer: Calcutta (or Kolkata)

3055. A legal code by this man was used by the Roman legal theorist Paulus to compose Lex Rhodia, which governed maritime laws in the eastern Mediterranean. This son of Sin-Muballit was supposedly given a codex by the god of Justice, Shamash [[shah-MAHSH]], while atop a mountain, possibly inspiring the story of Moses getting the Ten Commandments from God. "An Eye for an Eye" is a maxim found in, for the point, which Babylonian king's namesake "Code"?
Answer: Hammurabi (

3056. This man was able to transition from civil servitude to composition full-time after the wealthy patron Nadezhda [[nah-DESH-dah]] Von Meck sponsored him on the condition that they never meet in person. This composer wrote both the music and libretto to his opera, The Oprichnik. Inspired by his nation's victory at Borodino over Napoleon to write one composition, this composer implemented the sound of cannon fire at its climax. For the point, name this Russian composer of The 1812 Overture and Swan Lake.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky

3057. In order to protect this monarch and his family, Leopold II and Frederick William II threatened war in the Declaration of Pillnitz. The Marquis de Lafayette put down a riot against this monarch, resulting in the Champ de Mars [[SHAHMP duh MAHR]] Massacre. The National Convention convicted this king of high treason and executed him by guillotine in Revolution Square. The husband of Marie Antoinette was, for the point, which Bourbon king, deposed by the French Revolution?
Answer: Louis XVI [["the sixteenth"]] (

3058. In a work named for this field, ancient thinker Xenophon [[ZEN-uh-fun]] crafted a dialogue between Socrates and Ischomachus [[ISS-koh-MAHK-us]] in which they discuss farming techniques and how to manage a household. The first modern analysis in this field is considered Fernando Galiani's treatise Della Moneta. The mercantilism of Britain was criticized by Adam Smith in the The Wealth of Nations, a work in, for the point, what field concerning fiscal policy?
Answer: Economics (or Economists

3059. The duties of knighthood lead a mythical figure from this nation, Owain, to lose his love, "The Lady of the Fountain." The Celtic goddess of horses, Epona, is sometimes equated to this nation's mythic queen Rhiannon [[ree-AH-non]]. Bran the Blessed appears in a mythic cycle from this nation, attacking neighboring Ireland in an attempt to free his sister, Branwen. The Mabinogion [[MAH-bih- NOH-gee-un]] is a collection of myths from, for the point, which British substituent nation?
Answer: Wales (

3060. This man’s grand-nephew, George Hardeen, filed a court order to exhume his corpse to investigate whether he was murdered by spiritualists, whom this man had deemed frauds. This man popularized several tricks including being buried alive, shot with a cannon ball, and escaping from a straight jacket. Sometimes given the alliterative appellation, "Handcuff," for the point, who was this turn-of-the-century Hungarian-American illusionist?
Answer: Harry Houdini (or Erik Weisz)

3061. In an effort to win concessions in the last days of this war, Deng Hua [[DUNG-HWAH]] led the Jincheng campaign. The landings at Green, Blue, and Red Beaches led to combined UN forces securing the port of Incheon during this war. Following the loss of his capital early in this war, Syngman Rhee relocated the government to Busan [[boo-SAHN]]. The Demilitarized Zone was established following, for the point, what East Asian conflict of the 1950s?
Answer: Korean War (

3062. One book by this man, which is dedicated to Paul III, was published with a forward claiming it was only meant to make mathematical predictions. This author of On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres claimed that objects orbit in perfect circles. This man's namesake revolution led to the replacement of Ptolemy's geocentric model of the universe. For the point, name this Polish astronomer who promoted heliocentrism.
Answer: Nicolaus Copernicus (

3063. Protests of this legislation included the hanging of effigies of Massachusetts governor Andrew Oliver and of Martin Howard, who had promoted this legislation in "A Colonist's Defence of Taxation.” This legislation was introduced by George Grenville and inspired protests of "taxation without representation." For the point, name this 1765 act that required playing cards and newspapers sold in the American colonies to be printed on paper from London.
Answer: Stamp Act of

3064. A Wali from this city named Husayn Pasha ibn Makki failed to prevent a Bedouin raid of hajj pilgrims. A type of high-quality steel named for this city had its method of production lost to modern smiths. The assassination of Uthman during the First Fitna and the rise of the Umayyads led to this city becoming the Caliphate's capital until the Abbasids moved it to Baghdad. For the point, name this modern capital of Syria.
Answer: Damascus (

3065. During the French and Indian War, George Washington carried a recipe for a “small beer” made with this resource as a substitute for water. One plant was exported to the Thirteen Colonies to be distilled into this resource to make rum as part of the larger Triangle Trade Route. The 1919 bursting of a storage container containing this good killed 21 Bostonians in the city's North End. For the point, name this sticky byproduct of refining sugar.
Answer: Molasses (

3066. During the Cultural Revolution in China, musical works of this form were highly edited by Jiang Qing [[CHING] and her staff of composers. Kim Jong-il published a treatise written specifically about this musical style. Musicologists suggest that Mozart's three great works in this style are subtle commentaries on society, as were the works of Verdi and Wagner [[VAHG-nur]]. For the point, name this genre of theatrical music exemplified by The Marriage of Figaro and Nixon in China.
Answer: Opera

3067. This person is worshipped as a divine figure by the Yaohnanen [[yow-YAH-nen]] tribe, a cargo cult who venerate a photo depicting his 2007 visit to Vanuatu. This man, who was smuggled out of Greece as an infant in a fruit box, adopted his uncle's last name of Mountbatten due to anti- German sentiment in England. This man's funeral was held in April of 2021 in St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. For the point, name this man who held the title Duke of Edinburgh, the consort of Queen Elizabeth II.
Answer: Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (or Philip Mountbatten)

3068. An Upton Sinclair work titled solely for this commodity tells the story of the Ross family, who become wealthy due to finding this resource on the Watkins's Ranch. In the 1940s, the method of "Hydraulic Fracturing" was introduced to acquire this resource. A "spill" of this product by the BP Deepwater Horizon led to devastation in the Gulf of Mexico. The breakup of John D. Rockefeller's company in, for the point, what industry led to subsidiaries like Exxon and Chevron?
Answer: Oil (

3069. This city's Armenian Quarter was temporarily emptied following Justinian the Great's Monophysite [[muh-NAH-fih-site]] persecutions. While ruling a kingdom named for this city, Godfrey of Bouillon [[bwee-YOHN]] adopted the titles of princeps [[PRIN-seps]] and "Defender of the Holy Sepulchre" [[SEH-pul-ker]]. The success of the Maccabean revolt led to the cleansing of this city's Second Temple, inspiring the holiday of Hanukkah. The holiest city in Judaism is, for the point, what modern capital of Israel?
Answer: Jerusalem (

3070. After this man’s death, his literary rival, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, wrote an obituary and biographical profile of this man, depicting him as a drunken lunatic. In this man’s first publication, Tamerlane and Other Poems, he was credited as only “a Bostonian.” Before this author died under mysterious circumstances in Baltimore, he dreamt of producing his own journal, The Stylus. For the point, name this innovator in the detective genre who penned "The Raven."
Answer: Edgar Allan Poe

3071. Structures on this island were toppled over in the decades following the arrival of Jacob Roggeveen [ROH-ge-veen], the first European to visit this island. A yearly race to retrieve an egg from a rock next to this island was an important part of this island’s birdman cult. The still-undeciphered Rongorongo script was found on this island, which was annexed by Chile in 1888. For the point, name this island, home to sculpted heads called moai [[MOH-eye]].
Answer: Easter Island (or Rapa Nui)

3072. The appearance of one of these objects prompted the abdication of Emperor Ruizong [[RWEE-ZONG]], passing the throne to Xuanzong [[ZHWAN-ZONG]]. Suetonius [[sweh-TOH-nee-us]] records one of these events occurring a few months after the death of Julius Caesar, believed by Roman citizenry to be his departing soul. One of these objects named Hale-Bopp precipitated Napoleon's 1812 invasion of Russia. Mark Twain's birth year and death year coincided with the arrival of, for the point, what type of astronomical phenomenon named for Edmund Halley?
Answer: Comets (

3073. A downturn in this industry led to the Spitalfields [[SPIT-all-"fields"]] Riots in London's East End, where soldiers fired on weavers outside "The Dolphin" pub. Nylon was mass-produced in wartime Japan to replace a shortage of this product. The innovation of the Jacquard Loom led to resurgence of this cloth on the world market after it was overtaken by cotton. An ancient trade network traversing East Asia to Europe is named for, for the point, what luxury cloth?
Answer: Silk (

3074. It's not porcelain, but Parliament unintentionally increased the sale of this good following its ban on textile imports from China. Catherine de Braganza's arrival in England to marry Charles II likely made it fashionable to consume this drink daily rather than for medicinal purposes. The British East India Company's steady import of, for the point, what commodity led to its ubiquity in British culture?
Answer: Tea (

3075. Early in his reign, this king ordered the execution of his cousin, Amyntas IV. On his quest to reach the “ends of the world and the Great Outer Sea,” this man defeated the Indian King Porus at the Battle of the Hydaspes [[hy-DASS-pees]]. This member of the Argead Dynasty ascended to the throne after his sister’s wedding, at which his father was killed. For the point, name this king who created an empire stretching from Greece to northwestern India before his untimely death at age 32.
Answer: Alexander the Great (or Alexander III of Macedon

3076. In 1505 this man became a monk to honor a promise he made to Saint Anna after nearly being struck by lightning. This scholar discussed his daily habits in the book Table Talk and discouraged violence against feudal lords in his tract Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants. This theologian's stance against indulgences was laid out in a list of propositions he nailed to the door at All Saints' Church in Wittenberg [[VIT-en-berg]]. The author of the Ninety-Five Theses was, for the point, what seminal figure of the Reformation?
Answer: Martin Luther

3077. A former slave in this position was killed by being thrown down steps by his son-in-law and run over in a chariot by his daughter. Using the ruse of festival games, a holder of this position committed the abduction of the Sabine [[SAY-been]] women to populate his city. The Cult of Mars and the Vestal Virgins were established by the second holder of this position, Numa Pompilius. Tarquin [[TAR-kwin]] the Proud was the last person to hold, for the point, what regal position legendarily established by Romulus?
Answer: King of Rome (

3078. Operation Hectic was an SAS plot to assassinate this man and his aides by targeting their electoral headquarters with T-55 tank fire. This self-identified Marxist, who was replaced in a 2017 coup by Emmerson Mnangagwa [[mah-nahn-GAW-gwah]], signed the Lancaster House Agreement, toppling whites-only rule in Rhodesia. For the point, name this leader of the ZANU-Patriotic Front and long-time president of Zimbabwe.
Answer: Robert Mugabe [[moo-GAH-beh]] (or Robert Gabriel Mugabe)

3079. This man's forces fought the Ragamuffin War, a rebellion started by nomadic cowhands known as gauchos. This ruler deployed the Marquis of Erval to rebuff Paraguayan president Francisco Solano Lopez's invasion during the War of the Triple Alliance. This man's daughter, Isabel, passed the Golden Law, emancipating all the enslaved people in their nation in 1888. The final Emperor of Brazil was, for the point, which member of the House of Braganza, known as "The Magnanimous"?
Answer: Dom Pedro II (

3080. The founding of this empire coincided with the destruction of the Lodi [[LOW-die]] Dynasty following the First Battle of Panipat [[PAN-ee-pat]]. Along the Yamuna river, one of this empire's rulers ordered the construction of the asymmetrical Red Fort to commemorate the move of its capital from Agra to Delhi. This empire's rulers include the expansionist Aurangzeb [[ow-RAHNG-zeb]] and its founder, Babur the Tiger. Akbar the Great ruled, for the point, what Islamic empire of the Indian sub-continent?
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Hind-e Moǧulān

3081. A six-month-long occupation of this city began after several of Admiral Mayo's sailors were detained here, leading to the 1914 Tampico Affair. Winfield Scott and Matthew Perry organized the U.S. military's first large-scale amphibious assault in history to capture this port en route to Mexico City. For the point, name this Gulf of Mexico port city, at which Hernán Cortés first landed before conquering the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Veracruz (

3082. This political agreement was strengthened following Count Bernhard von Bülow [[BYOO- "low"]] threatening war over supremacy in Morocco. Foreign Secretary Lord Lansdowne ended Britain's era of "Splendid Isolation" by entering into this agreement in 1904. Support for Serbia pulled this alliance into a continental war following the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo [[SAH- rah-YAY-voh]]. The Central Powers fought World War One against, for the point, what political alliance of the UK, France, and Russia?
Answer: Triple Entente (

3083. This man was forced to resign as chamberlain for the king of Prussia after publishing "Diatribe of Doctor Akakia [[ah-kah-KYAH]]," criticizing Pierre Louis Maupertuis [[moh-pehr- TWEE]]. This thinker stated the Holy Roman Empire was "neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire." This man satirized Gottfried Leibnitz [[LIBE-nitz]] through his character of Pangloss in a novella subtitled Optimism. The character Candide [[kahn-DEED]] was created by, for the point, which French Enlightenment author?
Answer: Voltaire (

3084. One pseudo-scientific method that claims to be able to cure this condition includes high doses of vitamin C and "orthomolecular support," known as CEASE therapy. Leo Kanner first gave this term its modern usage and proposed the "refrigerator mother" theory, which has since been discarded. For the point, name this spectrum disorder characterized by difficulties in communication and social interaction.
Answer: Autism spectrum disorder (

3085. Al-Masudi, author of The Meadows of Gold, was known as "[this person] of the Arabic language." Boeotian [[bee-OH-shun]] native Plutarch called this man's writings "calumnious fictions." This man, who wrote in an Ionic dialect, finished an early historiography with the Battle of Mycale [[mih-KUH-lee]] in Book IX [[NINE]] of one work, dubbed "Calliope [[kah-LIE-oh-pee]]." The "Father of History" was, for the point, which Ancient Greek who detailed the Persian Wars?
Answer: Herodotus [[heh-RAH-doh-tuss]]

3086. This European man's namesake law code credits his ancestors, King Ina and King Offa, as being the first Brittonic men to be baptized. This man supposedly dressed as a bard to sneak into the city of Chippenham to gain intel prior to the Battle of Edington. This man, whose grandson Aethelstan united England, defeated the "Great Heathen Army" of the Viking leader Guthrum. For the point, name this "Great" king of Wessex and the Anglo-Saxons.
Answer: Alfred the Great

3087. After this artist designed an ashtray for Air India, they gifted him a baby elephant which was delivered to Cadaqués [[kah-dah-KESS]]. This monarchist was given the title "1st Marquess of Púbol [[POO-bohl]]" following a visit from King Juan Carlos I. This artist was expelled by the leftist André Breton [[breh-TOHN]] and his fellow surrealists for his ardent support of the Franco regime. The Persistence of Memory was painted by, for the point, what eccentric Catalonian artist?
Answer: Salvador Dalí (or Salvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dalí i Domènech)

3088. In 2012, nearly half the Honduran farmers of this good lost their yield due to a namesake "Rust." A religious form of this drink known as kishir was used by Sufi Dervishes to present to guests as they entered the home. Turks leaving leftover sacks of this good during the 1683 Siege of Vienna led to the construction of the first European house dedicated to this drink. The Ethiopian kingdom of Kaffa may have inspired the name of, for the point, what beans that are brewed into a caffeinated beverage?
Answer: Coffee (or Coffee beans

3089. In this war, the traitorous city of Capua [[KAP-yoo-uh]] was made ager publicus [[AH-ger POO-blih-kuss]], losing its civic rights. Quintus Fabius Maximus implemented his namesake delaying "Strategy" following this war's disastrous Battle of Cannae [[KAN-nee]], the bloodiest in the Republic's history. Losing this war's Battle of the Great Plains led Hannibal to abandon his Italian campaign to return to North Africa. Scipio [[SKIP-ee-oh]] Africanus's victory at Zama effectively ended, for the point, what Roman-Carthaginian War?
Answer: Second Punic War

3090. In this nation, a performance of the patriotic opera The Mute Girl of Portici [[por-TEE-chee]] led to riots outside the Royal Theatre of the Mint. This kingdom enlisted a gendarme [[zhahn- DAHRM]] known as the Force Publique [[poo-BLEEK]] to manage their Central African colonies. The Schlieffen [[SHLEE-fen]] Plan aimed to rapidly knock France out of the Great War by invading this smaller nation. Leopold II ruled, for the point, what European kingdom made up of Flanders and Wallonia?
Answer: Kingdom of Belgium (

3091. The book Team of Rivals opens in the midst of this election year. The short-lived Constitutional Union party ran its first and only presidential candidate, Tennessee senator John Bell, during this election cycle. The Democrats split into two distinct Northern and Southern factions during this election, with one side running Stephen A. Douglas and the other John Breckinridge. For the point, name this electoral cycle which preceded the Civil War, ending in a victory for Abraham Lincoln.
Answer: Election of

3092. During this war, the Count of Cavour sent a 15,000 man Sardinian expeditionary force, which proved critical during its Siege of Sevastopol [[seh-VASS-toh-pohl]]. The Earl of Cardigan led the ill- fated "Charge of the Light Brigade" during this war's Battle of Balaclava [[bah-lah-KLAH-vah]]. Florence Nightingale gained prominence during this conflict. For the point, what war, fought primarily on a namesake peninsula, halted Russian imperial expansion into the Black Sea?
Answer: Crimean War (

3093. The first opera commissioned in this nation's language, titled Özsoy [[UHZ-soy]], is a retelling of a story from the Shahnemah. A ruler from what is today this nation named Selim III hosted operatic performances in the Topkapi Palace. In this modern nation, Pedrillo [[peh-DREE-yoh]] aims to rescue his lover Konstanze from the harem of Osmin in a Mozart work. Janissary music inspired Abduction from the Seraglio [[seh-RAH-lyoh]], a singspiel set in what is today, for the point, what Middle Eastern nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Turkiye Cumhuriyeti

3094. Herman Sörgel [[SUHR-gul]] devised the Panropa plan to increase usable land around this body by strategically building hydroelectric dams. Glass ingots and Pistacia [[pih-STAY-shuh]] resin were found in the Uluburun shipwreck in this sea off the coast of Bodrum. The development of the 50-rower penteconter vessel facilitated maritime trade across the eastern portion of this sea. For the point, name this European sea which was known as Mare Nostrum [[MAH-reh NOH-stroom]] to the Romans.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea (

3095. According to Francis Fukuyama's The End of History and the Last Man, this event represented the conclusion of the last challenge to liberal democracy as an ideology. Four months prior to this event, the Gang of Eight perpetrated the August Coup, though it was stopped by pro-Yeltsin forces. The reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev failed to prevent this political event. For the point, name this disintegration of a Communist nation into constituent countries like Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Russia.
Answer: Dissolution of the USSR (

3096. Following various lawsuits, this organization committed Operation Freak-Out, which aimed to have reporter Paulette Cooper imprisoned. This organization infiltrated the IRS to purge information on their founder in Operation Snow White. This faith believes the Galactic Dictator Xenu [[ZEE-noo]] brought humans to Earth 75 million years ago. Since 1987, David Miscavige [[mis-KAV- idge]] has led, for the point, what "Church" founded by L. Ron Hubbard?
Answer: Church of Scientology (

3097. During this battle, a kamikaze squadron sank the carrier USS Bismarck Sea. Prior to this battle, Chester Nimitz claimed the Japanese would surrender the targeted island without a fight. Joe Rosenthal shot a partially-staged raising of the U.S. flag over Mount Suribachi [[soo-rih-BAH-chee]] during this battle. One of the last major battles of the Pacific Theatre was, for the point, what engagement on the namesake volcanic Japanese island?
Answer: Battle of Iwo Jima

3098. A scandal concerning this energy source was caused by the Virgil C. Summer expansion project in South Carolina, nearly bankrupting Westinghouse. Planning to exclusively use this energy source, Project Independence was a Nixon-era initiative to abandon the need for foreign oil by the year 1980. A radiation leak nearly led to a total meltdown at Three Mile Island, a plant utilizing, for the point, what energy source created through fission?
Answer: Nuclear Energy (

3099. Two inmates named Vrba and Wentzler name a report outlining the layout of this site, convincing Miklós [[MEE-klohsh]] Horthy to halt his deportation edict. The head of the Theresienstadt [[teh-RAY-zyen-SHTAHT]] orchestra, Pavel Haas, was sent to this place in 1944. A sign at this complex claimed "work sets you free," and this camp included the gas chambers at Birkenau. For the point, name this Nazi death camp in modern Poland, the deadliest of World War Two.
Answer: Auschwitz Concentration Camp (or Konzentrationslager Auschwitz

3100. While tramping around this city, Ignatius Reilly bemoans society's loss of Platonic values like geometry in A Confederacy of Dunces. The Creole-descended Edna Pontellier [[pohn-tel-YEH]], an unhappy resident of this city, drowns herself in the Gulf of Mexico during The Awakening. Blanche Dubois [[doo-BWAH]] in A Streetcar Named Desire moves to the French Quarter in, for the point, what Southern U.S. city?
Answer: New Orleans (

3101. This foodstuff is the most commonly used ingredient in a Caelius Apicius [[KAY-lee-us ah- "PICK"-ee-us]] manual, De re culinaria [[deh-reh-koo-lih-NAH-ree-ah]]. In medieval Nuremburg, this food's quality was regulated by its office of Wurstlein [[VURST-"lean"]]. In Maccabees, Jewish citizens openly refusing to eat this un-kosher food led to Antiochus [[an-TIE-oh-kuss]] IV's army attempting to kill them. For the point, name this meat forbidden in Islam, a food derived from swine.
Answer: Pork (or Ham

3102. Emperor Ferdinand I committed the "Blood Judgement" of this city to gain political control of it. Near Kahlenberg Mountain, Jan Sobieski [[YAHN soh-BYEH-skee]] led the Polish Hussars to break a 1683 Ottoman siege of this city. Following the Napoleonic Wars, Klemens von Metternich organized a "Congress" in this city, which aimed to end all continental wars by balancing the great powers of Europe. The Habsburgs ruled the Austrian Empire from, for the point, what city?
Answer: Vienna (or Wien)

3103. A remote lake in this range named the Roopkund is known for its high count of skeletons from far off lands like the Eastern Mediterranean Sea. Allied Pilots called the eastern end of this range "The Hump" due to its relative difficulty to cross while airlifting supplies to Republican China. Sherpa guide Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary summited this range's highest peak in the 1950s. For the point, name this range which forms the boundary of Tibet and Nepal, the home range of Mount Everest.
Answer: Himalayas (

3104. A cabal of politicians and distillers working within this man's administration were revealed by Benjamin Bristow to be avoiding state taxes. The New York Sun reported how Republicans close to this president were getting kickbacks from a fake railroad company, which greatly inflated its own costs. The Credit Mobilier [[moh-beel-YEH]] Scandal and the Whiskey Ring affected, for the point, the administration of which former Union general and U.S. president?
Answer: Ulysses S. Grant (

3105. In this nation, "The Scream of La Villa de Los Santos" began a major independence movement. The USS Nashville assisted this nation's soldiers stationed in Colon in repelling a Colombian invasion. During Operation Just Cause, the U.S. invaded this nation to depose de facto leader Manuel Noriega in 1989. For the point, name this Central American nation which contains a canal connecting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Republic of Panama (or Republica de Panama)

3106. This woman employed the Munshi Abdul Karim as an Urdu teacher, and she described her grandson, William, as possessing "little heart and tact." This person was advised in her early rule by Lord Melbourne, before forming a longtime friendship with Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli. The Crystal Palace Exhibition was the brainchild of this ruler's husband, Albert. For ten points, name this long-reigning monarch, who presided over much of nineteenth-century Britain.
Answer: Queen Victoria (or Alexandrina Victoria)

3107. One theory about this event claimed Judah P. Benjamin perpetrated it by enlisting the help of the Rothschild banking family from Europe. Police officer John Frederick Parker's abandonment of his post to grab a drink made this event possible. Major Rathbone was stabbed with a dagger during this event, shortly before a man shouted "Sic Semper Tyrannus" during a performance of Our American Cousin. John Wilkes Booth perpetrated, for ten points, what killing of the sixteenth president?
Answer: The Abraham Lincoln Assassination in Ford's Theater (

3108. A character in this short story passes British spy Major Andre’s tree and loses his horse Gunpowder’s saddle after a party in Tarry Town. In this story, Katrina Van Tassel marries Brom Bones, who laughs when a crushed pumpkin is found near where a schoolteacher, Ichabod Crane, has vanished while being chased by a Galloping Hessian. For ten points, name this short story by Washington Irving in which the title location is haunted by the Headless Horseman.
Answer: "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"

3109. The Four Books and Five Classics are the authoritative texts of this man's philosophy, one of the so-called Hundred Schools of Thought. The first of this man's Five Constants is rén, or "humaneness." This man believed that the emperor's Mandate of Heaven must be subject to absolute moral principles, including virtues like filial piety. For ten points, name this ancient Chinese philosopher known for his interpretation of the Golden Rule.
Answer: Confucius (

3110. A loan from this nation's Erlanger & Co. allowed the Confederacy to build ironclads as blockade runners. Three emissaries from this nation requested bribes from U.S. diplomats before allowing negotiations with Talleyrand in the XYZ Affair. The U.S. fought the Quasi-War with this nation, who earlier sent armed forces to the Thirteen Colonies during the Yorktown campaign. The Louisiana colony was sold to the United States by, for ten points, what European country?
Answer: Kingdom of France (or Royaume de France

3111. The building of this structure was supervised by Ustad Ahmad Lahauri, who also laid the foundations of the Red Fort. This building, whose name is derived from Persian, was ordered by an emperor who was put under house arrest by his successor, Aurangzeb [[ow- RAHNG-zeb]]. This building was originally constructed to house the tomb of Mumtaz. For ten points, name this enormous mausoleum in Agra, India, constructed by Shah Jahan.
Answer: Taj Mahal (or Rauza-i Munawwara)

3112. While en route to Western Europe, this man had 4,000 denarii seized in the port of Trebizond, retaining some of his wealth by sewing precious stones into his coat. With Rustichello da Pisa, this man published his travelogue under the title Book of the Marvels of the World. That work describes this man's trip to the palace of Xanadu [[ZAN-ah-doo]] and his travels along the Silk Road. For ten points, name this Venetian merchant who explored the Far East and served Kublai Khan.
Answer: Marco Polo

3113. Various speeches by this man were mixed with modern musical accompaniment by progressive rocker Giulio Neroni in the album Wake Up! Referencing the "calming of the storm" in the Book of Mark, this man gave an Urbi et Orbi address in the wake of the COVID- 19 pandemic. The 2021 Synod of Bishops was called by this figure following news of an abuse scandal in France. Jorge Bergoglio [[behr-GOH-lyoh]] is the birth name of, for ten points, what pope from Argentina?
Answer: Pope Francis (

3114. Verrocchio [[veh-ROH-kyoh]] depicted this figure in bronze following his most famous action, while Bernini sculpted a marble statue of this man during that same violent action. Donatello's sculpture of this figure was the first freestanding nude since antiquity, and another depiction of this hero has an oversized head to appear proportional from below. For ten points, name this Biblical king who was depicted in a marble sculpture by Michelangelo before he slays Goliath.
Answer: David (or Davit

3115. In modern Spain, this general created a makeshift bridge to cross the Baetis [[BAY- tiss]] River to win the Battle of Munda. Tribes like the Bibroci [[bee-BROH-kee]] and the Ancalites united around Cassibelanus [[cah-see-beh-LAH-nus]] in a failed attempt to repel this man's invasion of Britannia. This writer of De Bello Gallico defeated and captured the King Vercingetorix [[ver-sin-GEH-toh-riks]] during the Siege of Alesia. The Rubicon was crossed by, for ten points, what Roman dictator?
Answer: Gaius Julius Caesar (

3116. This journalist wrote for the newspaper Avanti!, but during World War One abandoned both it and his country's Socialist Party. This prime minister's followers, sometimes dubbed "Squadristis," were known as the Black Shirts. Declaring himself "Il Duce," [[eel-DOO-cheh]] this man aligned with Nazi Germany, though his armed forces failed to secure North Africa or stop the Allied invasion of Sicily. For ten points, name this leader of Italy during most of World War Two.
Answer: Benito Mussolini (or Benito Amilcare Andrea Mussolini) BONUS: Mussolini signed the Lateran Treaty to give independence to this tiny European city

3117. Practitioners of the Kumbhi Mela, a pilgrimage to this site, were attacked by the British during the seizure of Allahabad during the Sepoy Mutiny. The capital of the Nanda empire, Pataliputra [[pah-tah-lee-POO-trah]], was founded where this river meets the Son, and both the holy city of Varanasi and New Delhi lie on this river today. A namesake "Action Plan" by Rajiv Gandhi failed to clean-up, for ten points, which heavily polluted river in the eastern Indian sub-continent?
Answer: Ganges River (or the Ganga) BONUS: The Rajiv Gandhi administration also oversaw the recovery from the Bhopal disaster, a deadly event caused by a gas leak from this type of plant which produces chemicals meant to protect crops from harm. Pesticides (

3118. A group of Democratic representatives known as this scandal's "Babies" includes Vermont senator Patrick Leahy. During this scandal, Archibald Cox's refusal to drop a subpoena led to the "Saturday Night Massacre." This scandal involved wiretapping of the Democratic party's headquarters by the Committee to Re-elect the President. The resignation of Richard Nixon was motivated by, for ten points, what scandal revolving around a break-in at a namesake hotel?
Answer: Watergate Scandal BONUS: Which vice president of Richard Nixon later pardoned him during his own two-year presidential term, a deal often dubbed a "corrupt bargain"? Gerald Ford (or Gerald R(udolph) Ford, Jr.

3119. A major figure in this movement defined it in an essay titled "Answering the Question: What is [this movement]?" This movement's ideals were supposedly espoused by monarchs like Catherine the Great and were often spread through meetings at Masonic Lodges, coffeehouses, and salons. Preceded by Renaissance Humanism and the Scientific Revolution, for ten points, what intellectual movement of the 17th and 18th centuries was espoused by figures such as Immanuel Kant [[KAHNT]] and Voltaire?
Answer: Age of Enlightenment (

3120. The Hashemite monarch Faisal II ruled this nation until a 1958 officer coup executed him during the July Revolution. To counter Shia influence, this country invaded a neighbor led by Ayatollah Khomeini [[kho-MAY-nee]], resulting in a costly eight-year stalemate. This nation was the target of a 2003 U.S. invasion in an effort to depose its Ba'ath Party. The dictator Saddam Hussein led, for ten points, what Middle Eastern nation?
Answer: Republic of Iraq (or Jumhūriīyah al-ʿIrāq; or Komarî Êraq

3121. This man's son, Martin [[mahr-TEEN]], was exiled by Philip II of Spain after being in a plot to overthrow the Marqués de Falces [[FAHL-sess]]. Defying the governor of Cuba's return order, this man burned his own ships upon landing near modern-day Veracruz. Chroniclers report this man was mistaken for the god Quetzalcoatl [[KET-zahl-KWAH-til]], and he captured the city of Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohtch-teet-LAHN]] following the death of Moctezuma II. For ten points, name this conquistador who defeated the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Hernán Cortés BONUS: The ruins of Tenochtitlan lie beneath what North American capital city? Mexico City (

3122. The island of Gotland in this sea was the home of the Victual [[VIC-too-all]] Brothers, enemies of the Hanseatic [[HAN-see-at-ik]] League, a trading network of ports around this sea. The ports of Gdańsk [[guh-DANSK]] and Stockholm lie on this body of water, and the city of Saint Petersburg was created by Peter the Great to ensure Russian access to this sea. For ten points, name this large sea in northern Europe, named for an ancient tribe from what is now Lithuania and Latvia.
Answer: Baltic Sea(

3123. The whipping of the young chief of these people led to the cannibalization of a European ship's crew, an incident known as the Boyd Massacre. Clans of these people are known as hapū, and after gaining firearms from Europeans, these people fought the Musket Wars. The poorly-translated Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] led to this people group signing away their land to British authorities. The indigenous people of New Zealand are, for ten points, what Polynesian culture?
Answer: Māori BONUS: This British captain and navigator was the first European to successfully communicate with the Māori and names the strait separating North and South island. James Cook (

3124. Democratic president whose policies led to the highest number of U.S. ground troops.
Answer: Lyndon Baines Johnson (or LBJ)

3125. Republican president who gradually pulled out of the war through his policy of Vietnamization.
Answer: Richard M(ilhous) Nixon

3126. Neighboring Southeast Asian nation which, along with Laos, was secretly bombed.
Answer: Kingdom of Cambodia (or Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea)

3127. South Vietnamese capital whose 1975 fall signaled the end of the war.
Answer: Saigon (or Ho Chi Minh City)

3128. 1968 "Offensive" named for a holiday, which included the Hue [[WAY]] Massacre and the Battle of Khe Sanh [[KAY SAHN]].
Answer: Tet Offensive (or Sự kiện Tết Mậu Thân)

3129. North Vietnamese-supported guerillas who fought against U.S. forces.
Answer: Viet Cong (or

3130. Carcinogenic defoliant used by the U.S. army to destroy Vietnamese agriculture and lessen jungle thickness.
Answer: Agent Orange

3131. 1964 "Incident" named for a body of water which was cited as an impetus for increasing the U.S. presence.
Answer: Gulf of Tonkin Incident (

3132. Holy wars first called by Urban II which aimed to Christianize foreign lands.
Answer: Crusades (

3133. "Great" Pope who names both a "Calendar" and a "Chant."
Answer: Pope Gregory I (or Gregory the Great

3134. Papal-appointed officers who rooted out heresy across Western Europe.
Answer: Inquisitors (

3135. "Permit" bought by the faithful, purported to absolve them of sins.
Answer: Indulgences

3136. Most common order of monks in medieval Western Europe, known for their black clothes and their mantra, "Work and Pray."
Answer: Benedictine monks (or Benedictines

3137. Saint and namesake of the Slavic alphabet who proselytized the Slavs with his brother, Methodius.
Answer: Saint Cyril (

3138. Dualist Christian heresy originating in Southern France which was eradicated following the Albigensian war.
Answer: Catharism (

3139. Father of Richard the Lionheart who supported the papal call during the Third Crusade.
Answer: Henry II (

3140. Andean crop, a famine of which killed over one million Irish people in the 19th century.
Answer: Potatoes (

3141. Bird once found exclusively in the New World supposedly eaten at the first Thanksgiving.
Answer: Turkey

3142. American plant often ceremonially smoked by natives, which was first successfully planted in Europe in a region called "Los Cigarrales."
Answer: Tobacco

3143. Animal introduced from Europe that was adopted by Plains Indians to assist in herding bison.
Answer: Horses

3144. New World bean, the basis of chocolate, that was once used as a currency throughout Mesopotamia.
Answer: Cacao (

3145. Nightshade fruit which was believed to be poisonous until a gardener proved to Philip II that it was good for sauces.
Answer: Tomatoes

3146. Venereal disease from the Americas which ravaged Europe after Columbus's soldiers campaigned in Italy in the late 15th century.
Answer: Syphilis

3147. Pseudo-cereal in the Amaranth family cultivated in the Andes and banned by the colonial Spanish in favor of maize.
Answer: Quinoa (or Kinwa)

3148. Like the Ancient Egyptians, this civilization depicted women as white-skinned and men as red. This civilization's deities were primarily female, such as a snake goddess, and its people honored them through the display of double-headed axes and the sport of (+) bull leaping. Arthur Evans was the first to distinguish this civilization from the later Myceneans [[MY-seh-NEE-ens]], although he was unable to (*) decipher its "linear" script. For ten points, name this proto-Greek civilization of Crete.
Answer: Minoans (

3149. This company briefly purchased Columbia Pictures but sold it to Sony following the failure of Ishtar. Near its headquarters, this company operates a multi-storied tourist attraction called the "World of" (+) [this company]. Founded by Asa Griggs Candler to sell a namesake drink invented in 1886 by John Pemberton, (*) for ten points, name this multinational beverage corporation based in Atlanta, Georgia, the chief rival of Pepsi.
Answer: The Coca-Cola Company (

3150. In the aftermath of this event, the victor fled to St. Simon's Island in Georgia to hide at Pierce Butler's plantation. The victim of this event supposedly told Dr. David Hosack he intended to (+) shoot into the ground, and this event occurred in part because one participant opposed the other's 1800 U.S. presidential run. Weehawken, (*) New Jersey was the sight of, for ten points, what violent confrontation between the former Secretary of the Treasury and the sitting vice president?
Answer: Burr-Hamilton Duel (

3151. These specific people were banned from working on the Sabbath in the "Manifesto of three-day Corvee [[kor-VEH]]" passed by Paul I. During the "Forbidden Years," the hardship of the (+) Livonian wars and crop failure led to these specific people losing their right to move from their estate. These people paid a rent known as obrok to the landed (*) boyars they served. In 1861, Alexander II emancipated, for ten points, what peasant class of Russia?
Answer: Russian Serfs (

3152. In this nation, Hezekiah Ochuka was hanged for his leadership of a 1982 coup attempt, which failed after most of his soldiers got drunk instead of arresting the sitting president. The White Highlands of this nation were seized during the (+) Mau Mau Uprising, whose participants included Daniel arap Moi and Jomo (*) Kenyatta. Formerly known as British East Africa, for ten points, what nation includes cities such as Mombasa and Nairobi?
Answer: Republic of Kenya (or Jamhuri ya Kenya)

3153. Known as heket to the Egyptians, this good fills the "mouth of a perfectly contented man," according to a 23rd century BC proverb. Shorting a customer of this substance is punishable by (+) drowning per the Code of Hammurabi, and the Sumerians drank a thick version of this beverage through a straw. Cereals like barley and (*) wheat are used to make, for ten points, what ancient alcoholic drink often made at a brewery?
Answer: Beer

3154. One composer from this modern-day country used a "sacred minimalist" sound that is exemplified by his Symphony of Sorrowful Songs and the (+) Copernican Symphony. Another composer from this country wrote a series of pieces based on music from this country, including mazurkas and polonaises, though he is best known for his études and the Minute Waltz. (*) For ten points, name this home country of Henryk Górecki and Frédéric Chopin [[shoh-PAHN]], who was born in the Duchy of Warsaw.
Answer: Republic of Poland (or Rzeczpospolita Polska

3155. After the Great Flood of 1927 on this body of water, over 200,000 displaced Black people moved north, joining the Great Migration. The longest (+) levee system in the world was authorized in response to this body overflowing in the most destructive flood in U.S. history. Many downriver parishes in (*) Louisiana were destroyed during the 1927 "Great Flood" of, for ten points, what major U.S. river that enters the Gulf of Mexico near New Orleans?
Answer: Mississippi River

3156. This man's middle name meant "troublemaker" in the Xhosa [[KOH-sah]] language. As a member of his country's Communist Party, this man lived on the Liliesleaf Farm while heading "Spear of the Nation." (+) In 1964, this man declared "I Am Prepared to Die" during the Rivonia Trial. During his country's first free elections in 1994, this man's African (*) National Congress defeated F.W. de Klerk's National Party. For ten points, name this first post-apartheid South African president.
Answer: Nelson Mandela (or Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela

3157. The northern half of this peninsula was controlled in the 600s by an Exarchate [[EKS- ar-kate]] based in Ravenna. Hannibal Barca crossed the Alps with a mercenary army to raid this peninsula which hosts ancient cities like Mediolanum. The Umbrians and Samnites fought a nascent republic on this peninsula. For ten points, name this peninsula, the former home of the Etruscan civilization and the heart of the Roman Empire.
Answer: Italian Peninsula (

3158. This leader obtained a doctorate in quantum chemistry in 1986 prior to entering politics. This politician played a central role in negotiating the Treaty of Lisbon and was a main figure behind the stimulus plan to help shelter the European Union from the Great Recession. The leader of the Christian Democratic Union from 2000 to 2018, this politician was elected to her highest position in 2005. For ten points, name this first female chancellor of Germany.
Answer: Angela Merkel (or Angela Dorothea Merkel

3159. Friedrich Miescher [[MEE-shuh]] first identified this molecule in 1869, calling it nuclein. Helicases create a "fork" during the replication of this molecule, whose structure was identified thanks to Rosalind Franklin's Photo 51. For ten points, name this molecule that is often sequenced, best identified by its double-helix structure documented by Watson and Crick.
Answer: DNA (

3160. This man ordered the Hungnam Evacuation following his failure to predict an invasion by the People's Volunteer Army. This man's failure to abandon the strategically insignificant site of Peleliu [[peh-LEH-loo]] resulted in devastating losses for U.S. marines. This man's support of the use of nuclear weapons in the Korean War led to his sacking by Harry S. Truman. For ten points, name this Supreme Allied commander in the Pacific Theater.
Answer: Douglas MacArthur

3161. This ruler called Foreign Minister Nikita Panin a "personal encyclopedia," though Panin fell out of favor by advocating for the Northern Alliance with Prussia. To convince this empress that the typical serf fares well, her lover and advisor Grigory Potemkin supposedly showed her retinue false villages in Crimea. Upon conversion to the Russian Orthodox church, the name Yekaterina was given to, for ten points, which Russian empress of the 18th century?
Answer: Catherine the Great (

3162. The "Plan of the Three Guarantees" in this nation's city of Iguala established a short- lived Constitutional Monarchy there. The ransacking of a foreign chef's shop led to the First French Intervention in this nation during the Pastry War. This nation's war of independence began after the Grito de Dolores by Don Miguel Hidalgo. Much of New Spain was made up of, for ten points, what North American nation to the south of the United States?
Answer: United

3163. This one-time Minister to France refused to condemn the Reign of Terror saying it would "Undermine the cause of republicanism in America." With James Madison, this man sponsored and wrote the National Gazette to raise money for his agrarian party. For ten points, name this Secretary of State in the first presidential cabinet, the rival of Alexander Hamilton and principal author of the Declaration of Independence.
Answer: Thomas Jefferson

3164. Ibn Battuta claimed that this structure's purpose was to keep out demonic beasts named Gog and Magog. The first sections of this structure were believed to have been built during the Spring and Autumn Period. The rebel Li Zicheng was defeated by a combined force of Manchus and General Wu Sangui's [[SAHNG-GWEES]] loyalists at this structure's namesake fortress in the Battle of Shanhai Pass. For ten points, name this series of fortifications across northern China.
Answer: Great Wall of China (

3165. This artist may depict Harman van Swole in a Portrait of a Slav Prince later bought by Catherine the Great. This artist was hired by the Guild of Surgeons in his home nation to paint the dissection of the deceased criminal Aris Kindt. Another work by this man depicts a shooting company led by Franz Banning Cocq [["COKE"]] in The Night Watch. For ten points, name this prolific Dutch artist whose other work includes many self-portraits and The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp.
Answer: Rembrandt van Rijn (or Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn

3166. In Islam, this book is identified with a pre-Islamic holy book titled Zabur. Portions of this book labelled mizmor were originally intended to be sung. Many sections of this book are attributed to Asaph and the Sons of Korah. The 23rd chapter of this book begins with the line "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want." For ten points, name this Old Testament book that contains many poems attributed to King David.
Answer: Book of Psalms (or The Psalter

3167. The Cripps mission was a failed attempt to secure this colony's full cooperation in its colonizer's World War Two efforts. This colony's Lucknow Pact united its rival Muslim League and a namesake National Congress. The last viceroy of this colony was Lord Mountbatten, who withheld support for the creation of an independent Pakistan. Gaining its independence as the culmination of the 3 June Plan was, for ten points, what subcontinental British colony?
Answer: India (

3168. This ruler met up with Maximilian I to defeat the French at the Battle of the Spurs, though he later took part in a peaceful celebration with Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. After supporting the Acts of Supremacy, this monarch presided over the dissolution of his country's monasteries. That occurred after this man broke from the Catholic Church in order to divorce Catherine of Aragon. For ten points, name this Tudor king of England, remembered for his six wives.
Answer: Henry VIII [[the eighth]] BONUS: This woman became Henry's second wife after he secured his divorce from Catherine. This woman was the mother of future Queen Elizabeth I. Anne Boleyn

3169. The extinct great auk lived around the northern part of this ocean, and the Grand Banks in this ocean were a major center for cod fishing until their depletion in the 1990s. The navigator Himilco might have discovered this sea's Sargasso region in the 5th century BC. Most likely named for a certain globe-carrying Titan, for ten points, what is this ocean on which one finds the cities of Boston and New York?
Answer: Atlantic Ocean BONUS: The Grand Banks lie off the coast of this island which was possibly known as "Vinland" to Leif Ericson. It is the site of the Viking village L'Anse aux Meadows [[lahn-soh- meh-DOH]]. Newfoundland (do not

3170. The Ratha was a variant of this military technology introduced during India's Harappan [[hah-RAH-pun]] period. In an effort to counter heavy hoplite [[HOP-lite]] infantry, Xerxes I [[ZERK-seez "the first"]] deployed the "scythed" variety of this technology. The Battle of Kadesh was the largest battle deploying this military technology. For ten points, name this swift, often multi-horsed conveyance used in Bronze Age warfare.
Answer: War Chariots (

3171. This island's Sette Giugno [[seh-TAY JYOON-yoh]] holiday commemorates a British massacre of Italian irredentists. It's not Rhodes, but King George VI [[the sixth]] awarded this entire island the George Cross after it resisted Axis bombing campaigns. The image of Ottoman invincibility was shattered after the Knights Hospitaller successfully defended this island in 1565. Jean Parisot de Valette [[pah-ree-SOH duh-vah-LET]] names the capital of, for ten points, what small island nation to the south of Sicily?
Answer: Republic of Malta (or Repubblika ta' Malta

3172. This man's work as a secretary has led to debate over how much of his personal philosophy went into the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, which espoused aristocracy and slavery. One work by this thinker outlines the "State of Nature" and claims that society was built to protect property, which he defined as "life, liberty, and estate," inspiring Thomas Jefferson. For ten points, name this English empiricist and "Father of Liberalism" who wrote Two Treatises of Government.
Answer: John Locke BONUS: Much of Locke's philosophy is built on this concept, established in a namesake book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. This theory asserts that the public has directly or indirectly consented to give up their personal freedom to an authority in exchange for protection and order. Social Contract Theory (or The Social Contract)

3173. A craze concerning this technology struck England in 1896 as people believed it had both beautification and germicidal properties. Until the 1950s, this technology was sold commercially to U.S. shoe stores to help associates size customers. Discoverer Wilhelm Roentgen [[VIL-helm RENT-gehn]] shouted “I have seen my death!” due to this invention revealing his hand's metacarpals and phalanges. For ten points, name this form of electromagnetic radiation often used to see if human bones are broken.
Answer: X-Ray (

3174. Following this event, Enver Hoxha [[HODJ-uh]] pulled Albania out of the Warsaw Pact. In protest of the end of this event, student Jan Palach [[YAHN pah-LAHK]] set himself on fire in Wenceslas [[WEN-seh-slahss]] Square. Military intervention during this event was justified by the Brezhnev Doctrine. The reforms of Alexander Dubček [[DOOB-chek]] led to, for ten points, what 1968 period of liberalization that was crushed by Soviet intervention in the namesake Czech city?
Answer: Prague Spring (

3175. Mansa who devalued the price of gold in Cairo due to his generosity.
Answer: Mansa Musa I

3176. Good produced by Mali used to preserve meat, worth its weight in gold.
Answer: Salt (or NaCl; or Sodium Chloride)

3177. Legendarily wealthy metropolis on the Niger [[nee-ZHER]] River annexed into the empire in 1324.
Answer: Timbuktu (or Tin Buqt)

3178. Rival West African empire which eclipsed Mali in importance in the 16th century.
Answer: Songhai

3179. West African university which was purported to have a larger collection than the Library of Alexandria.
Answer: Sankore University (or Sankoré Madrasah)

3180. Mandinka king who established the Mali Empire.
Answer: Sundiata [[soon-JAH-tah]] Keita (

3181. 14th century Moroccan traveler who detoured his hajj to spend eight months in the Mali Empire.
Answer: Ibn Battuta

3182. Malian storytellers who passed down oral histories and royal epics.
Answer: Griots (

3183. Czech city in which a "Defenestration" of Catholic officials began the Bohemian phase of the war.
Answer: Prague (or Prag)

3184. Dynasty of Holy Roman Emperors from Austria who fought to reinstitute Catholicism as the majority faith in the realm.
Answer: Habsburgs

3185. Region of Spain, including Barcelona, which revolted during a sub-conflict within the war.
Answer: Catalonia (

3186. German region which names a series of peace treaties ending the war.
Answer: Westphalia (or North Rhine-Westphalia

3187. Swedish "Lion of the North" who intervened to win a major victory at Breitenfeld [["BRIGHT"-en-feld]].
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus (or Gustav II)

3188. 16th century treaty which allowed Imperial princes to choose what Christian faith to follow.
Answer: Peace of Augsburg (

3189. French cardinal and "prime minister" who was the architect of France's entry into the war on the Protestant side.
Answer: Cardinal Richelieu (

3190. Catholic League general who sacked the city of Magdeburg and won the Battle of White Mountain in Bohemia.
Answer: Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly (

3191. Religious prophet of whom the Abbasids considered themselves the successor.
Answer: Muhammad ibn Abdullah (

3192. Color of the Abbasid flag, meant to contrast with the white banner of their predecessors.
Answer: Black (

3193. City in modern Iraq built to be their capital.
Answer: Baghdad

3194. Title claimed by their ruler which translates to "successor" in Arabic.
Answer: Caliph

3195. Enslaved soldiers who later founded a sultanate in Egypt that was conquered by the Ottomans.
Answer: Mamlukes

3196. Islamic dynasty they defeated and usurped in 750 CE.
Answer: Umayyad (or Umayyads)

3197. Discipline of mathematics involving symbols whose name means "restoration," derived from a book by al-Khwarizmi.
Answer: Algebra (

3198. Structure in the Abbasid capital which kept great works of literature from the personal collection of Harun Al-Rashid.
Answer: House of Wisdom (

3199. This politician signed the Mulford Act, against which the Black Panthers protested by marching on his capitol bearing arms. This man called in the National Guard to quell the People's Park Protest in the city of (+) Berkeley. After impressing his fellow Republicans with a speech in support of Barry Goldwater, this man defeated Pat Brown to become the governor of California. (*) For ten points, name this man who gave the "Time for Choosing" speech and was later elected president of the United States in 1980 and 1984.
Answer: Ronald Reagan (or Ronald Wilson Reagan)

3200. The Shapley-Curtis debate centered on whether or not this structure was a "spiral nebula." The center of this structure contains a radio source discovered in 1931 by Karl Jansky, the supermassive black hole Sagittarius (+) A-star, and this structure was believed by the Babylonians to be the severed tail of a dragoness. Orbited by Large and Small Clouds named for (*) Ferdinand Magellan, for ten points, what is this galaxy which is home to the Sun and Earth?
Answer: Milky Way galaxy

3201. This city was founded in 1565 by Pedro Menéndez de Avilés [[ah-vee-LEHS]] on the feast day of the patron of brewers. This city was intended to be turned into a winter resort by an industrialist who constructed the Hotel Alcazar and Hotel Ponce de Leon. (+) Leased convict labor was used in this city to construct a railroad funded by Henry Flagler, who is buried in this city. (*) For ten points, name this Florida city, the oldest continuously-inhabited European settlement in the United States.
Answer: St. Augustine (or San Agustín)

3202. With his lover, this crown prince planned to flee to England and potentially usurp the throne from his father during the Katte [[KAH-tuh]] Affair. The failure of the Austrians and Russians to follow-up on the Battle of (+) Kunersdorf was known as this king's "Miracle of the House of Brandenburg." This German's victory in the Seven Years' War led to his country's annexation of (*) Silesia. For ten points, name this "Great" king of Prussia during the mid-18th century.
Answer: Frederick the Great (or Friedrich der Große [["GROSS"-uh]]

3203. The Bandeirantes [[bahn-deh-RAHN-tehs]] were adventurers in this modern nation who dressed like Jesuits to dupe natives into enslavement. Those raiders often spoke Língua Geral [[LEEN-gwah heh-RAHL], a (+) pidgin which mixed this country's European language with Tupi. This South American nation allied with Argentina and Uruguay in a "Triple Alliance'' to halt Paraguayan aggression. Pedro (*) Cabral discovered, for ten points, what large former Portuguese colony?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil (or República Federativa do Brasil

3204. The mercenary group known as "The Black Band" fielded a contingent of men who wielded a zweihander [[ZVAI-hahn-duh]], a type of this weapon. Toyotomi Hideyoshi conducted "hunts" named (+) for these weapons, which seized them from the peasantry to create a government monopoly on them. The katana and rapier are (*) types of, for ten points, what sharp weapons often used for stabbing or cutting?
Answer: Swords (

3205. Scholars believe this mythic figure was syncretized with the Italic shepherd Garanus upon arrival to the Italian peninsula. Alongside Pompeii, a city bearing the name of this figure was partially preserved under the ash from the eruption of Mount (+) Vesuvius. Brandishing a lion skin pelt, the Roman emperor Commodus [[KAH-moh- dus]] often dressed as this mythic figure during his gladiatorial fights. (*) For ten points, name this Roman demi-god and son of Jupiter, known for his immense strength.
Answer: Hercules (

3206. This country was listed as "for sale" on eBay in 2006, and bids reached nearly 3,000 dollars before it was shut down. The 12-feet tall Giant Moa was hunted into extinction by Eastern Polynesian (+) settlers who arrived in what is now this nation in the 13th or 14th century. The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings were primarily filmed in this country's (*) North and South Islands. The British established the colonial capital of Auckland in, for ten points, which nation in Oceania?
Answer: New Zealand (

3207. In the aftermath of this event, a building at Ignalina, Lithuania was closed by international agreement. The "Red Forest" was created by this event, after which a bubbler pool was (+) drained thanks to the efforts of three engineers who were awarded the Order of Courage by Petro Poroshenko. Wildlife has run rampant in a 30- kilometer area called the Zone of Alienation (*) that was created after this event. For ten points, name this nuclear disaster that occurred outside Pripyat [[PREE-pyat]], Ukraine.
Answer: Chernobyl disaster (

3208. This U.S. immigrant's early ventures included investments in Adams Express and the founding of the Keystone Bridge Company. After selling his largest company to J.P. Morgan, this author of the "Gospel of Wealth" created a namesake foundation to establish libraries and research councils. Making most of his wealth as a steel magnate, for ten points, what Scottish-born American philanthropist built an eponymous concert hall in New York City?
Answer: Andrew Carnegie

3209. Cave paintings in the Acacus [[ah-KAH-kus]] Mountains indicate this desert may only have formed after the last Ice Age. The Tibesti mountains lie in this desert, which in recent decades has advanced south into the Sahel [[sah-HEEL]]. Peoples including the Berbers and the Tuareg [[TWAH-reg]] led gold and salt caravans across this desert. Historically crossed by Bedouin caravans, for ten points, what is this massive desert in northern Africa?
Answer: Sahara Desert (or aṣ-ṣaḥrāʼ al-kubrá)

3210. This woman's actions at Werowocomoco [[way-ruh-wah-KOH-muh-koh]] are detailed in a letter to Queen Anne of Denmark. This woman died after travelling to England with her husband, John Rolfe, ten years after she intervened in an execution ordered by her father, the Powhatan [[POW-uh-tan]] chief. For ten points, name this Native American "princess" who supposedly saved the life of John Smith during the first year of Jamestown.
Answer: Pocahontas (

3211. This structure's "Robber's Tunnel" was likely resealed during the Ramesside Restoration, one of many ancient sites refurbished by the sitting government. At the foot of this structure is a preserved solar barque [[BARK]] known as Khufu's Ship. First built in the 26th Century BC, this building stood as the tallest structure in the world until the construction of the Lincoln Cathedral in 1311. For ten points, name this Egyptian tomb and "Ancient Wonder of the World."
Answer: Great Pyramid of Giza (

3212. During Operation Iskra, Kirill Meretskov [[meh-RET-skof]] conducted an effort to open this city to a supply route known as the "Road of Life." In conjunction with Finland, Nazi Germany's Army Group North besieged this city for two and half years during World War Two. The outbreak of World War One led to this city being renamed Petrograd. The Hermitage and Winter Palace are in, for ten points, what one-time capital of Imperial Russia?
Answer: St. Petersburg (or Leningrad

3213. During this conflict, the The Sun's headline "Gotcha" caused controversy for downplaying its casualties. Operation Rosario, ordered by Leopoldo Galtieri [[gahl-TYEH- ree]], began this war, which included an engagement between the General Belgrano and the HMS Conqueror. Margaret Thatcher and her War Cabinet quickly recaptured South Georgia during this conflict. The UK and Argentina vied for control of a namesake Atlantic archipelago in, for ten points, what ten-week war in 1982?
Answer: Falklands War (

3214. A member of this religious sect named Alice Paul served as president of the National Women's Party. The only U.S. president to follow this denomination's teachings was Richard Nixon. This sect's persecution in England led William Penn to request that James II give him and his followers land in the New World. For ten points, name this pacifist Christian sect more formally known as the Society of Friends.
Answer: Quakers (

3215. Callimachus [[kah-lee-MAH-kuss]] died at this battle while chasing the losing side to their ships. One side in this battle failed to get reinforcements due to the Carneia [[kar-NAY- uh]] festival. The winning strategy in this battle was created by Miltiades [[mil-TYE-ah-deez]], who defeated the forces of Darius I. A messenger supposedly ran over twenty miles to report this battle's outcome. For ten points, name this battle of the Greco-Persian Wars that inspired a lengthy footrace.
Answer: Battle of Marathon (or Machē tou Marathōnos)

3216. This country purged its military in the 2000s on the basis of the “Ergenekon” [[ar- geh-NEH-kon]] ultra-nationalist conspiracy. In 2019, this country launched Operation Peace Spring after the U.S. pulled its support from Kurdish allies. This country has been accused of democratic backsliding and Islamism under the AKP, or Justice and Development Party, hurting their chances of joining the EU. For ten points, name this country led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[reh-CHEP ty-EEP EHR-duh-wahn]].
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti)

3217. A pro-cleric branch of this ideology known as Integralism attempted to overthrow Getulio [[zheh-TOO-lyoh]] Vargas during the Guanabara attack in Brazil. MP Oswald Mosely led a British Union of this ideology, which plummeted in popularity following the Night of the Long Knives. The Falangist [[fah-LAHN-jist]] party of Spain followed this ideology. "National Socialism" in Germany was a subset of, for ten points, what nebulously-defined radical far- right ideology, popular in the Interwar years?
Answer: Fascism (

3218. In this city, millwright Rufus Putnam created effective prefabricated fortifications prior to the battle of Dorchester Heights. Henry Knox dragged cannons captured at Fort Ticonderoga to assist in Washington's capture of this city. William Prescott and Israel Putnam led a failed defense of Breed's Hill during Thomas Gage's 1775 assault on this city. A 1770 "Massacre" occurred in, for ten points, what New England city, the site of the Battle of Bunker Hill?
Answer: Boston BONUS: Which future U.S president successfully earned the acquittal of the perpetrators of the Boston Massacre as a lawyer in their

3219. Using an aquarium, filmmaker Georges Méliès [[mel-YAY]] simulated exploring this ship's wreckage in a 19th century silent short film. The 1898 Del Peral [[peh-RAHL]] Inquiry found that this ship's demise was not caused by hitting a mine. In an example of "yellow journalism," this ship's name was rhymed with the phrase "To Hell with Spain" by the U.S. press. For ten points, name this cruiser whose sinking in Havana Harbor was an impetus for the Spanish-American War.
Answer: USS Maine BONUS: This newspaper magnate and inspiration for the film Citizen Kane used the Maine tragedy as a way to bolster sales during the Circulation Wars with Joseph Pulitzer. William Randolph Hearst

3220. This man made a 300-mile long journey to Delagoa Bay following his escape from a Boer prison camp. The disaster of the Dardanelles campaign, especially the Battle of Gallipoli [[gah-LIH-poh-lee]], led to this man's resignation as First Lord of the Admiralty. Following the Dunkirk evacuation, this PM gave the "This was their finest hour" speech to the House of Commons. For ten points, name this prime minister of the UK during the majority of World War Two.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill) BONUS: Churchill served as War Secretary to this prime minister of Welsh descent who made up the Big Three at Versailles with Georges Clemenceau [[kleh-mahn-SOH]] and Woodrow Wilson. David Lloyd George (

3221. During this dynasty, the oldest still-extant wooden building in the world, the Buddhist Nanchan Temple, was built. This dynasty failed to assert control over the Fergana Valley following a military defeat by the Abbasids at the Talas River. The An Lushan Rebellion hastened the fall of this dynasty, and Empress Wu briefly interrupted it in the late 7th century. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty which succeeded the Sui [[SWEE]] and was followed by the Song.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (

3222. Cicero [[SIH-seh-roh]] called this city's general Epaminondas [[eh-pah-mih-NAHN- duss]], who fell at the Battle of Mantinea [[mahn-tih-NEH-ah]], the "First Man of Greece." Until their defeat at Chaeronea [[kay-roh-NAY-uh]], a unit of 300 male lovers called the Sacred Band defended this city. This city-state, which was legendarily founded by Cadmus, was fought over by the two sons of Oedipus in Seven Against [this city]. For ten points, name this Boeotian [[boe-EE-shuhn]] city-state which shares its name with an ancient Egyptian capital.
Answer: Thebes (

3223. This politician had three electoral votes cast for him in the 2016 election from the state of Washington. This man became National Security Adviser for Reagan in the wake of the Iran-Contra Scandal. Following the January 2021 Capitol attacks, this politician publicly left the Republican Party. This man died from COVID-19 complications at Walter Reed hospital in October of 2021. The secretary of state during the first George W. Bush administration was, for ten points, which four-star general?
Answer: Colin Powell (or Colin Luther Powell) BONUS: What "massacre" of Vietnamese citizens by U.S. troops under William Calley was allegedly "whitewashed" by a then 31-year old Colin Powell? My Lai [[MEE "LIE"]] Massacre

3224. Theia [[THAY-uh]] was one of these beings, who with her consort, Hyperion, birthed Eos [[AY-ohs]], Selene, and Helios. One of these beings, Iapetus [["eye"-AP-ih-tus]], fathered the figures who respectively gave humans fire and who held up the world, Prometheus and Atlas. The most powerful of these beings was the husband of Rhea [[RAY-uh]] and castrated his father, Uranus, before being defeated and cast into Tartarus. For ten points, name these pre-Olympian gods who were overthrown by Zeus and his siblings.
Answer: Titans (

3225. In this nation, Inaka [[ee-NAH-kah]] is a term for people who live in small hamlets far from major metropolitan areas. An eighth-century Shugendo monk was the first to summit one of this nation's "Three Holy Mountains," Mount Haku. Every twenty years, this nation's pilgrimage site, the Ise [[EE-seh]] Grand Shrine, is rebuilt to represent death and renewal in the Shinto faith. The cities of Osaka and Nagasaki are found in, for ten points, what East Asian nation?
Answer: Japan (

3226. Leader of the Nationalist forces that won the war.
Answer: Francisco Franco (or Francisco Franco Bahamonde)

3227. Spanish capital whose fall marked the end of the war.
Answer: Madrid

3228. Basque city whose bombing inspired a Picasso artwork of the incident.
Answer: Guernica

3229. "Brigade" named for an U.S. president which supported the Republicans during the war.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln Brigade (

3230. "Legion" sent by Hitler to provide air support to the Falangists [[fah-LAHN-jists]], resulting in bombings throughout Spain.
Answer: Condor Legion (or Legion Condor

3231. U.S. author who based his novel For Whom the Bell Tolls on his experiences in the war.
Answer: Ernest Hemingway (or Ernest Miller Hemingway)

3232. Term for Spanish monarchists who aimed for a Bourbon revival during the war.
Answer: Carlist (

3233. President of Spain and member of the Republican Left Party whose election triggered the war.
Answer: Manuel Azaña (or Manuel Azaña Díaz)

3234. Founder of the Soviet Union who led the Bolsheviks during the revolution.
Answer: Vladimir Ilych Lenin (or Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov)

3235. Deposed Tsar killed in Yekaterinburg by Bolshevik soldiers.
Answer: Nicholas II Romanov

3236. War Soviet Russia pulled out of after the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
Answer: World War One (or WW One

3237. Palatial complex in St. Petersburg occupied by the Bolsheviks, causing the fall of the Provisional Government.
Answer: Winter Palace (or Zimnij dvorets)

3238. Primary Bolshevik military used to fight the anti-communists and establish Soviet Socialist Republics.
Answer: Red Army (or Krasnaya Armiya

3239. Colorfully-named force supported by the Western Powers which fought the Bolsheviks during the Russian Civil War.
Answer: Whites (

3240. Trudovik president of the Provisional Government and leader of the prior February Revolution.
Answer: Alexander Kerensky (or Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky)

3241. U.S. journalist buried in the Kremlin who recounted events in Ten Days that Shook the World.
Answer: John "Jack" Reed (or John "Jack" Silas Reed)

3242. Only nation to gain independence via a slave revolt, led by Toussaint L'Overture [[too-SAHNT loh-vehr-TYOOR]] and Jean-Jacques Dessalines [[deh-sah-LEEN]].
Answer: Republic of Haiti (

3243. Abolitionist who aimed to start a slave revolt through his raid on Harpers Ferry.
Answer: John Brown

3244. 1831 insurrection in Southampton County, Virginia led by a namesake enslaved preacher.
Answer: Nat Turner's Rebellion (

3245. Florida tribe formed from a combination of runaway slaves and remnants of the Muskogee [[mus-KOH-gee]] people.
Answer: Seminoles

3246. Spanish schooner taken over by West African slaves, resulting in a namesake Supreme Court case.
Answer: The Amistad (or La Amistad

3247. Community of Free Black people in Jamaica who resisted British rule through a series of guerilla wars.
Answer: Maroons

3248. Revolt led by a man named Cato in South Carolina which aimed to move its participants to Spanish Florida.
Answer: Stono Rebellion

3249. Caribbean island on which Bussa's Revolt began on Easter Sunday at Bailey's Plantation.
Answer: Barbados

3250. Ne Win of Myanmar may have been trained by the last of these people. Ten of these people formed a group of "Braves," and some used a tool named for "water spiders." In one incident, these people replicated Mon lamps in (+) an attack. Nightingale floors were intended to expose these people, whose training likely originated with the Iga clan in the Kansai region. Often shown with star-shaped (*) shuriken, for ten points, who were these stealthy Japanese mercenaries?
Answer: Ninja (

3251. A ruler of this empire produced the Kandahar [[KAN-dah-har]] Inscription, written in Aramaic and Greek, to encourage foreigners to adopt "Dharma." Seleucus I Nicator [[seh-LOO-kas "the first" neh-KAY-tor]] sent the diplomat (+) Megasthenes [[meh-GAS-theh-nees]] to this empire's court, resulting in the ethnography Indika. Much of the Deccan Plateau region was conquered and held by this empire's ruler Bindusara. The Buddhist convert (*) Ashoka ruled, for ten points, what ancient Indian empire founded by Chandragupta [[chahn-drah-GOOP-tah]]?
Answer: Mauryan Empire (or the Mauryans

3252. In this nation, the nau cargo ship known as Nossa Senhora sank in its longest river while carrying peppercorns back from India. In the 15th century, Afonso III from the House of Aviz styled himself ruler of this one-time (+) kingdom and the recently conquered region of Algarve [[al-GAR-veh]]. The expedition to Ceuta [[seh-YOO-tah]] was launched from this nation's city of Porto by Henry the Navigator. (*) For ten points, identify this European country on the Iberian Peninsula, governed from Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal (

3253. A group of Democrats with this name nominated former Republican John M. Palmer as their presidential candidate in 1896. An 1869 "Panic" over this good occurred after investors Jay Gould and James (+) Fisk attempted to corner its market. At the 1896 DNC, bimetallism supporter William Jennings Bryan delivered a speech stating "you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of" (*) [this good]. For ten points, name this precious metal whose "Standard" was abandoned by Richard Nixon.
Answer: Gold (

3254. This figure may have invented the plot in which Royalist Cécile Renault [[ray- NOH]] hid two small knives in a bag in an attempt to kill him. With support from the Garde National, the faction known as the Thermidorians ousted (+) this man and sent him to the guillotine [[GEE-yoh-teen]]. The "Reign of Terror'' was (*) overseen by, for ten points, which radical lawyer and head of the Committee of Public Safety during the French Revolution?
Answer: Maximilien Robespierre (or Maximilien François Marie Isidore de Robespierre)

3255. The body of this nation's King Alexander I was thrown off a balcony of the "Old Palace" during its May Coup, which replaced him with Peter I. Alongside Romania and Greece, this nation seized territory from Bulgaria during (+) the Second Balkan War. Austria-Hungary gave this smaller nation the July Ultimatum after nationalist Gavrilo Princip killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Bosnia (*) . For ten points, name this Balkan nation, the most populous constituent of the former Yugoslavia.
Answer: Republic of Serbia (or Republika Srbija

3256. This painting, which was likely completed after Parnassus and La Disputa, is in the first of the four rooms decorated by its artist in the Apostolic (+) Palace. This painting depicts figures as diverse as Ptolemy and Zoroaster, alongside a conversing Plato and Aristotle. (*) For ten points, name this large Renaissance fresco by Raphael depicting the title ideal institution in an ancient Greek city.
Answer: The School of Athens (or Scuola di Atene)

3257. One of this country's literary "superfluous men" fails to win the love of Tatyana after informing her that he will grow bored of marrying her. The creator of that character allegedly inspired the play The Inspector General by another author from this country. The author of Eugene (+) Onegin was from this country, as was another writer whose epileptic son inspired the character Alyosha [[ahl-YOH-shah]] in The Brothers Karamazov. Alexander Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, (*) and Fyodor Dostoyevsky are from, for ten points, which European nation?
Answer: Russia (

3258. A man from this Protestant sect, William Prynne, wrote a scathing critique of mainstream religion called Histriomastix, condemning the excesses of Renaissance theatre. This movement's ban of (+) Christmas celebrations led to riots in southeast England. This Christian sect, of which Oliver Cromwell (*) was a member, dominated the early politics of colonial New England. For ten points, name this religious movement of the UK and the Thirteen Colonies which aimed to purge the Anglican Church of Roman Catholic traditions.
Answer: Puritans BONUS: This company has been a leader in the "microcomputer revolution" and was founded in

3259. This alchemist and pursuer of the philosopher's stone developed a theory of color he discussed in the book Opticks. This scientist's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy explained his law of universal gravitation, developed using a calculus notation he derived independently of Gottfried Leibniz [[LIBE-nitz]]. For ten points, name this English polymath who also theorized three eponymous laws of motion.
Answer: Sir Isaac Newton

3260. This nation's partisans like the BOPA assisted in the evacuation of the majority of its Jewish population to the neutral Kingdom of Sweden. The United States bought the Virgin Islands from this country, and this European nation gave limited autonomy to its colony of Greenland in 1979. Iceland was once controlled by, for ten points, what Scandinavian nation governed from Copenhagen?
Answer: Kingdom of Denmark (or Kongeriget Danmark

3261. In the Life of Saint Boniface, the title saint cuts down a tree sacred to this non-Roman deity in Hesse [[HEH-suh]]. In his treatise Germania, Tacitus [[TASS-ih-tuss]] referred to this god as the "Hercules" of the Suebi [[SWAY-bee]] people, while "Mercury" was the equivalent of Odin. In opposition to the Christianization of Scandinavia, many believers wore charms depicting this god's hammer Mjölnir [[MYOHL-neer]]. For ten points, name this widely- worshipped red-headed Norse god of thunder.
Answer: Thor (

3262. The idea for this work's fourth and final movement was likely borrowed from the work of Luigi Cherubini [[keh-roo-BEE-nee]] and consists of a lengthy coda followed by 29 bars of C Major chords. This piece's composer supposedly told his secretary, Anton Schindler, that its opening motif represented "fate knocking at the door." A famous "short-short-short- long" motif opens, for ten points, what symphony by Ludwig von Beethoven?
Answer: Beethoven's Fifth (or Symphony No. 5 by Ludwig van Beethoven in C minor)

3263. An injury kept this academic from representing the UK at the 1948 Olympics as a marathon runner. A 2017 "Law" named for this scientist provided amnesty to UK men charged under anti-homosexuality legislation. The Battle of the Atlantic began tipping in the favor of the Allies in large part due to this man cracking the German naval Enigma code. A machine which can replicate any computer algorithm is named for, for ten points, which British computer scientist?
Answer: Alan Turing (or Alan Mathison Turing)

3264. Josef Stalin sent employees of this company’s Gorki plant in Nizhny Novgorod to a gulag during the Great Purge. In 1932, more than 60 workers were injured by this company's security and Dearborn police following [this company's] "Hunger March." This company’s “Edsel” line of cars was named for the son of its founder and became synonymous with failure in the 1950s. For ten points, name this company which made the popular Escort, F-Series, and Model T automobiles.
Answer: Ford Motor Company

3265. John Balliol [[BAY-lee-ahl]] abdicated this position and was successfully freed by Pope Boniface VIII [[the eighth]] following Edward I's invasion of his kingdom. One of Idi Amin's many titles proclaimed him to be the "Last" person to hold this regal position. The Catholic-driven "Rising of the North" attempted to replace Elizabeth I with her cousin Mary, who held this title. Robert the Bruce and the House of Stuart held, for ten points, what royal title also held by Macbeth?
Answer: Ruler of Scotland (or Ruler of Scots

3266. Several city-states of this civilization were defeated by their rival, Spearthrower Owl, a leader of Teotihuacan [[teh-oh-tee-HWAH-kan]]. The military outpost of Dos Pilas [[PEE- lahss]] switched between this civilization's two rival cities of Calakmul [[kah-lahk-MOOL]] and Tikal [[tee-KAHL]]. The Temple of Kukulcan [[koo-kool-KAHN]] was built in this civilization's settlement of Chichen Itza [[CHEE-chen EE-tzah]]. For ten points, name these Mesoamerican people who developed a namesake "Long Count'' calendar.
Answer: Maya People (or Mayans

3267. Chemist Friedrich Accum [[ah-KUHM]] wrote a treatise concerning this food, denouncing the pre-modern practice of using non-foods such as chalk and sawdust as additives. The scarcity of this foodstuff led to the "March on Versailles" [[vehr-"SIGH"]] by Parisian women in the early French Revolution. In Juvenal's [[JOO-veh-nahls]] Satires, he paired this word with "circuses" to signify mollifying the masses. For ten points, name this staple food of the Western world made from grinding and baking wheat.
Answer: Bread (

3268. Future Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin [[meh-NAH-kem BEH-gin]] sent a parcel bomb meant to kill this nation's head of state, instead killing police officer Karl Reichert [["RYE"-kert]]. This state's "Economic Miracle" was orchestrated by Ludwig Erhard [[EHR-hard]] and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer [[AH-den-ow-uh]]. For ten points, name this country, sometimes known as the "Bonn Republic," which reunified with an eastern communist neighbor in 1990.
Answer: West Germany (or West Deutschland

3269. During this period, the art of lone storytelling called rakugo grew in popularity as the Chōnin middle class emerged. This period began following a victory by the "Eastern Army" over Toyotomi [[toh-yoh-TOH-mee]] loyalists at the Battle of Sekigahara [[seh-kee-gah-HAH- rah]]. This period's ruling dynasty was weakened when Commodore Matthew Perry forced an end to Sakoku isolation. A clan of Shoguns established by Ieyasu [[ee-eh-YAH-soo]] ruled from modern-day Tokyo in what historical Japanese period?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu

3270. During this war, the burning lights of trailing hospital ships triggered the Battle of Tsushima [[soo-SHE-mah]] Strait, a disastrous loss for the 2nd Pacific Squadron. Teddy Roosevelt earned a Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the Treaty of Portsmouth, which ended this conflict. The Battle of Port Arthur began, for ten points, what war in which Emperor Meiji's [[MAY-jees]] government attempted to curb the influence of a tsarist empire?
Answer: Russo-Japanese War (

3271. While serving under this general, Dubliner Arthur Sandes led a critical charge of riflemen during the Battle of Boyacá [[boh-yah-KAH]]. A series of massacres committed by Royalists led this general to call for the "Decree of War to the Death" during the Admirable Campaign. This military commander served as the autocrat of Gran Colombia until his deposition in 1830. For ten points, name this Latin American "liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar BONUS: This long-time president of Venezuela established a

3272. This man's tweet claiming he could take his company "private at $420 per share" led to him paying 40 million dollars in penalties to the Securities and Exchange Commission. This man's "Boring Company" is testing intra-city travel through the experimental "Hyperloop System," and that company broke off from this businessman's other enterprise, SpaceX. As of September 2021, the wealthiest man on earth is, for ten points, which CEO and founder of Tesla?
Answer: Elon Musk (or Elon Reeve Musk) BONUS: Musk passed which Amazon founder as the wealthiest person in the world? Jeff Bezos (or Jeffrey Preston Bezos

3273. Often incorporating aspects of the cult of Serapis [[seh-RAP-iss]], this deity names a "Mystery" practiced in the Greco-Roman world which guaranteed practitioners a place in the Fortunate Isles. An aspect of this goddess related to "Pharos" [[FAY-rohss]] was worshipped by sailors hoping to have favorable seas. Scholars have speculated that images of this goddess with Horus on her lap inspired iconography of Mary with an infant Christ. Osiris [[oh-"SIGH"- riss]] is resurrected by, for ten points, which sister-wife of his, an Egyptian fertility deity?
Answer: Isis [["EYE"-siss]] (

3274. Don Pellegrini is executed in this city by a Nazi occupation force led by Major Bergmann in a Rossellini film set in this city, which began his "Neo-realist Trilogy." A young Audrey Hepburn appears as Princess Ann in a 1951 film titled for a "Holiday" in this city, visiting sites like the Spanish steps and the Trevi fountain. Ben-Hur's chariot-racing scene occurs in the Colosseum of, for ten points, which Italian capital city?
Answer: Rome (

3275. Welsh settlers immigrated to the south of this modern nation in its Chubut province where its government conducted the "Conquest of the Desert." The Puelches [[PWEL-kess]] people used a system of irrigation in the dry lands of this modern nation's Mendoza province later adapted by the colonial Spanish. This nation's navy sank the Brazilian flotilla during the Battle of Juncal [[hoon-KAHL]]. For ten points, name this South American country, whose capital lies on the southern shores of the Río de la Plata.
Answer: Argentina (

3276. This ruler's namesake "Donation" was a forged 8th century decree claiming he made Rome superior to the other Holy Sees, such as Antioch. This ruler ordered the symbol Chi Rho [[KYE ROE]] to be painted on his soldiers' shields to assure victory at Milvian Bridge. This ruler ended the systemic persecution of Christians through the Edict of Milan. The Council of Nicaea [[ny-SAY-ah]] was called by, for ten points, which "Great '' Roman emperor who created a namesake capital from the city of Byzantium?
Answer: Constantine I (or Constantine the Great

3277. People group in modern-day France over whom he ruled.
Answer: Franks (or Frankish people)

3278. Dynasty he was part of, named for his grandfather, Charles Martel.
Answer: Carolingians (or Carlovingian; or Carolingus; or Karolinger; or Karlings)

3279. Title he took following his crowning by the Pope, later used by medieval rulers of Germany.
Answer: Holy Roman Emperor (or Emperor of the Romans

3280. Capital of his empire, known in French as Aix-La-Chapelle [[ay-lah-shah-PEHL]].
Answer: Aachen [[AH-ken]] (or Oche)

3281. People who seized much of Italy during the Gothic Wars whom he dislodged from the peninsula in the 770s.
Answer: Lombards (or Langobards)

3282. King of Aquitaine and "Pious" ruler whom he appointed as his successor.
Answer: Louis the Pious (or Louis le Pieux

3283. Scholar in his court who wrote the biography Vita Karoli Magni.
Answer: Einhard (

3284. 843 treaty which split his realm between his grandsons.
Answer: Treaty of Verdun [[vehr-DUN]]

3285. Kingdom formally annexed by him following the capture and execution of Cleopatra.
Answer: Egypt (or Aegyptos)

3286. Rival and loyal general to Julius Caesar whom Augustus defeated at the naval Battle of Actium.
Answer: Mark Antony (

3287. Building material with which he claimed to have rebuilt Rome.
Answer: Marble

3288. Term used to describe the roughly 200 years of relative stability following his rule.
Answer: Pax Romana

3289. Biblical figure and Client-King for Rome who committed the "Massacre of the Innocents."
Answer: Herod the Great

3290. Title he used instead of imperator to portray himself as an equal to the other denizens of the empire.
Answer: First Citizen (

3291. Losing commander at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest whose ghost was supposedly asked to "give [him] back [his] legions."
Answer: Publius Quinctilius Varus

3292. Right-hand man who commanded his armies in the Wars of the Second Triumvirate.
Answer: Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa

3293. Leading nation of the Central Powers who attempted to draw them into World War One through the Zimmerman Note.
Answer: German Empire (

3294. Revolutionary during the Mexican Civil War whose raid on Columbus, New Mexico triggered a failed U.S. manhunt.
Answer: Francisco "Pancho" Villa (or José Doroteo Arango Arámbula)

3295. U.S. president who allowed the Bracero [[brah-SEH-roh]] worker program to augment labor during World War Two.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (

3296. Industry nationalized by the Lazaro Cardenas government, who formed the company Pemex.
Answer: Oil Industry (or Petroleum Industry)

3297. Guerillas named for a deceased revolutionary who rebelled in Chiapas [[chee-AH- pahss]] following the passage of NAFTA.
Answer: Zapatista Army of

3298. Party who dominated their politics for six decades starting in the 1940s.
Answer: PRI (or Partido Revolucionario Institucional; or Institutional Revolutionary Party)

3299. Civil war triggered by Plutarco Calles's [[CAH-yes]] anti-Catholic reforms in the 1930s.
Answer: Cristero War

3300. Popular moderate president who was assassinated during the Ten Tragic Days of the Mexican Revolution.
Answer: Francisco Madero (or Francisco Ignacio Madero González)

3301. Following the Battle of Niagara Falls, one side in this war ceased attempts to conquer Canada. One side in this war lost the Battle of the Thames [[TEMZ]] after (+) recruiting Tecumseh's Confederacy. The Treaty of Ghent officially ended this war shortly before Andrew Jackson's forces won the Battle of New Orleans. (*) For ten points, name this early-nineteenth century conflict that rekindled animosity between Great Britain and the United States.
Answer: War of

3302. In the prelude to this battle, one side scored easy victories at Bordeaux [[bor- DOE]] and Narbonne over Duke Odo the Great. During this battle, many Mozarabic soldiers abandoned the general Abd al-Rahman in (+) an effort to protect their own camp from being plundered. Prior to this battle, Pope Gregory III provided a loan to a "Mayor of the Palace" nicknamed "The Hammer" to repel an Umayyad (*) invasion of Gaul. For ten points, name this 732 Frankish victory by Charles Martel.
Answer: Battle of Tours (

3303. This man's death by road accident in the Dorset countryside in 1935 led neurosurgeon Hugh Cairns to develop the motorcycle helmet. This intelligence officer proved vital in the capture of Aqaba [[AH-kah-bah]] (+) by allied Hejazi [[heh-JAH-zee]] forces. This man's autobiography, Seven Pillars of Wisdom, concerns his involvement in the Arab Revolt. (*) For ten points, name this British officer whose efforts in World War One inspired a film starring Peter O'Toole.
Answer: Lawrence of Arabia (or T(homas) E(dward) Lawrence)

3304. Cuban poet José Martí wrote a Centenario of this man in 1889, calling him a "Hero in Peace and War." Phillis Wheatley (+) wrote, "Proceed, great chief, with virtue on thy side" in an 18th-century poem titled for this politician. Parson Weems composed many stories about this man, including the fable of his chopping down a (*) cherry tree. For ten points, name this literature-inspiring first president of the United States.
Answer: George Washington (

3305. Due to using this network, John van Zandt was taken to court for punitive damages by plantation owner Wharton Jones. "Conductors" who used this network used "stations" as (+) safehouses often run by members of the Quaker denomination including Levi Coffin. The nickname "Moses" was given to this entity's most successful guide, Harriet Tubman. (*) For ten points, name this so-called "railroad," a series of routes used by the enslaved to escape to the Northern U.S. and Canada.
Answer: Underground Railroad

3306. In this country, illegal miners who carry green bowls on their backs are given the nickname "ninja miners." This country's Dukha community, part of the larger Tuvan people, herd (+) reindeer near its Lake Khövsgöl [[HOOVS-gull]]. The Turquoise Hill Mine is a large copper and gold-mining project in this country, where traditional herders live in tents called yurts. The former heartland of the realms of (*) Genghis Khan is in, for ten points, what landlocked East Asian country?
Answer: Mongolia (or Mongol Ulus)

3307. In an attempt to end this war, a cohort of wives threatens to withhold sex from their men in the play Lysistrata. The Aristophanes [["air"-ih-STAH-feh-nees]] play Peace celebrated the recently-signed Peace of Nicias [[nee-KEE-us]] meant (+) to halt this war for fifty years. During this war, the statesman Pericles [[PEH-rih-klees]] gave a funeral oration at a cemetery near the Acropolis. The contemporary Thucydides [[thoo-SIH-dih-dees]] wrote a History of, (*) for ten points, what Greek conflict between two factions led by Athens and Sparta?
Answer: Peloponnesian War

3308. This anti-imperialist openly criticized the U.S. for perpetrating the Moro Crater Massacre in his essay Incident in the Philippines. This author served a two-week stint in a Confederate militia known as the (+) Marion Rangers before deserting. This Missouri man described his time as a steamboat pilot in the antebellum period in Life of on the (*) Mississippi. For ten points, name this writer whose upbringing inspired The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Answer: Mark Twain (or Samuel Langhorne Clemens)

3309. This U.S. president admitted the United States's only pair of twin-born states after shuffling their papers to conceal which was the first admitted. The final state this president admitted, out of six, was the first to grant (+) women the vote as a territory. This president presided over the "Billion Dollar Congress" and signed the Sherman Antitrust (*) Act. For ten points, name this man who was both successor and predecessor of Grover Cleveland.
Answer: Benjamin Harrison (

3310. An 8 inch tall statue of Mao Zedong was placed at this site by an expeditionary team led by Wang Fuzhou [[WAHNG FOO-ZHOH]] who used the "human ladder" technique to reach it. The 1970 Khumbu Icefall killed various local contractors working to prepare Japanese skier Yūichirō Miura's attempt to ski down this peak. This mountain, also called Sagarmatha, was first summitted by Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary. For ten points, name this Himalayan mountain on the Nepal-China border, the highest point on Earth.
Answer: Mount Everest (or Chomolungma

3311. Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner [[DUH-buh-"rye"-nuh]] named a set of triads in an early formulation of this display. John Newlands attempted to create this display, which was inspired by the observations of Lothar Meyer. Some members of this diagram were originally prefixed "eka-," and this diagram once contained entries such as coronium and aether. Containing components like hydrogen and helium, for ten points, what diagram, developed by Dmitri Mendeleev [[men-deh-LEY-eff]], organizes the chemical elements?
Answer: Periodic Table of Elements

3312. At this event, a preacher became famous for saying "Praise the Lord and pass the ammunition" to rally the spirit of the troops. This attack, codenamed Operation Z, began after one side exclaimed, "Tora! Tora! Tora!" This event resulted in the deaths of over 2,000 servicemen, primarily due to the sinking of both the USS Oklahoma and the USS Arizona. For ten points, name this attack on December 7th, 1941, in which Japan bombed a U.S. naval base in Hawaii.
Answer: Attack on Pearl Harbor (

3313. Troops preparing to confront this force were told "I have the heart and stomach of a king" by their leader at Tilbury. This force was commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia and lost at the Battle of Gravelines [[grahv-LEEN]]. Sir Francis Drake helped defeat this force shortly after he attacked Cádiz to "singe the beard of" its nation's ruler, Philip II. For ten points, name this fleet of ships sent by Spain in 1588 in an attempt to conquer England.
Answer: Spanish Armada (or Grande y Felicísima Armada

3314. This politician hired education reformer John Dewey, who suggested switching his country's alphabet to a Latin script. In 1924, this politician formally abolished the last recognized caliph, Abdulmejid II. Following this man's failure to get the League of Nations to annul the Treaty of Sèvres [[SEH-vruh]], this head of the Ankara government launched an invasion of the Greek zone of occupation. The father of modern Turkey was, for ten points, which 20th century politician?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (or Mustafa Kemal Pasha

3315. In Operation Northwoods, the Department of Defense proposed intentionally killing immigrants and blaming it on this nation as a false flag. Freedom fighters used the yacht Granma to sail from Mexico to this nation in the hope of overthrowing Fulgencio Batista. The failure of John F. Kennedy to provide air support doomed the exile-led Bay of Pigs invasion of this nation. The 26th of July Movement led by the Castros took control of, for ten points, what nation?
Answer: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)

3316. This orator gave the speech "An Undefended Land" to preach the dangers of Nazism to the British people. In the poem "The Rowers," this man used the term "Hun" as a derogatory name for the citizens of the German Empire. This Orientalist author used the historical "Great Game" as the backdrop for his novel Kim. The first English recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature was, for ten points, what author of The Jungle Book?
Answer: Rudyard Kipling (or Joseph Rudyard Kipling)

3317. This man once performed a duet with Condoleezza Rice and the following year performed during a recitation of the names of the dead at Ground Zero on the first anniversary of 9/11. This student of Leonard Rose and Pablo Casals typically plays a 1733 Montagnana [[mon-tan-YAH-nuh]] named "Petunia," though he was also bequeathed the Davidov Stradivarius by Jacqueline du Pré. For ten points, name this Chinese-American classical musician, a world-renowned cellist.
Answer: Yo-Yo Ma

3318. This man supposedly diverted an invasion of Britannia to have his army collect seashells along the English Channel. While campaigning with his father, Germanicus, this man earned a nickname related to wearing a child's version of a military outfit. This emperor, who was assassinated by the Praetorian Guard, supposedly tried to make his horse Incitatus [[in- kih-TAH-tuhss]] a Roman consul. For ten points, name this insane successor of Tiberius, whose name translates to "Little Boot."
Answer: Caligula (

3319. While a French colony, this nation's capital of Grand-Bassam was temporarily abandoned after an outbreak of yellow fever in favor of the city of Bingerville. A future president of this nation and leader of the Popular Front, Laurent Gbagbo [[gah-BAHG-boh]], fled in the 1980s due to pressure from Félix Houphouët-Boigny [[oo-FWEH bwah-NEE]]. For ten points, name this West African nation named for a commodity produced by elephants, now illegal in most nations.
Answer: Ivory Coast (

3320. This writer documented a six-week marine expedition in the Sea of Cortez and later went "In Search of America" in a rented pickup truck with his poodle. This author of Travels with Charley won a Pulitzer Prize for a novel in which Jim Casy is beaten to death after the Joad family travels to California during the Dust Bowl. For ten points, name this American author known for his Depression-era stories of California, including The Grapes of Wrath.
Answer: John Steinbeck (or John Ernst Steinbeck, Jr.) BONUS: Steinbeck considered his magnum opus to be this

3321. This celebrity served as the public face of the America First Committee, which pressured the government of Franklin D. Roosevelt to remain neutral during the Second World War. This Medal of Honor recipient traveled over 3,000 miles in his personal airplane, The Spirit of St. Louis. For ten points, name this American aviator who did the first non-stop, solo flight across the Atlantic.
Answer: Charles Lindbergh (or Charles Augustus Lindbergh) BONUS: While on a tour of Germany, Lindbergh was presented with various medals by this Nazi head of the Luftwaffe [[LOOFT-vah-fah]] who earlier created the Gestapo [[geh-SHTAH- poh]]. Hermann Göring [[GEH-ring]] (or Hermann Wilhelm Göring; be lenient on pronunciation)

3322. One king of these people named Cetshwayo [[ketsh-"WHY"-oh]] had his cause taken up by Lady Florence Dixie after spending two years in exile. Following a victory for these people at Isandlwana [[ee-sahn-JWAH-nah]], a contingent of their soldiers were cornered and defeated at Rorke's Drift. The "horn of the buffalo" formation was used by a regiment of these people known as the Impi. The conquests of Shaka led to the establishment of an empire of, for ten points, what people in Southern Africa?
Answer: Zulu (or amaZulu) BONUS: At the Battle of Blood River, 500 of these Dutch-descended travelers defeated 15,000 Zulu warriors. They fought a namesake war with the British at the turn of the 20th century. Boers (

3323. The "Praises of Italy" passage is found in a treatise concerning this subject written by Virgil known as the Georgics. Dactylic hexameter is used in another treatise on this subject by Hesiod [[HEH-see-ud]] known as Works and Days, imploring the reader to pray to Demeter. Cato the Elder describes the virtues of animal husbandry and plowing, both subsets of, for ten points, what discipline in his work, De Agricultura?
Answer: Farming (

3324. This god is commonly depicted with Ganga [[GUNG-guh]] flowing from his matted hair and with a third eye that he used to destroy the god of love, Kama. This god beheaded his wife's son and guard before giving him the head of an elephant. This father of Kartikeya [[kar- tih-KEH-yah]] and Ganesh [[gah-NESH]] is the husband of Parvati. For ten points, name this Hindu god of destruction, who makes up the Trimurti with Brahma and Vishnu.
Answer: Shiva (

3325. A Soviet Republic based in this city collapsed after its leader, Eugen Leviné [[leh-vee- NEH]], was shot in Stadelheim [[SHTAH-del-hime]] Prison. A conference named for this city resulted in Nazi Germany receiving the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia. The SA and Adolf Hitler led the "Beer Hall Putsch" in this city. For ten points, name this southern German city, which is the capital and largest city of Bavaria.
Answer: Munich (

3326. One of these groups named Hispana vanishes from history around 120 AD and is known as the "lost '' one of these groups. Marius made these groups permanent standing bodies and professionalized their subcommanders, the centurions. These groups each consisted of over 5000 infantry members and 120 foreign auxilia cavalry during the height of the Empire, at which time there were as many as thirty of them. For ten points, name these highest-level divisions of the Roman army.
Answer: Roman Legions (

3327. In the aftermath of a revolt by this figure, the freedman Polyclitus [[pah-lee-KLY- tuss]] led an investigation that deposed governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus [["GUY"-us swee- TOH-nee-us paw-"LIE"-nuss]]. This woman's husband, Prasutagus [[prah-soo-TAY-gus]], originally submitted to vassal status during the conquests of Claudius. With the Trinovantes [[trih-noh-VAN-teez]], this woman's combined tribal army burned down both Eboracum [[eh-BOR-sh-kum]] and Londinium. For ten points, name this queen of the Iceni [["eye"-SEE- nee]] tribe who led Britons in a 1st century revolt against the Roman Empire.
Answer: Boudicca (

3328. Conservative PM of the 1980s, dubbed "The Iron Lady."
Answer: Margaret Thatcher (or Margaret Hilda Thatcher; or Baroness Thatcher)

3329. Former mayor of London who led the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Answer: Boris Johnson (or Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson)

3330. PM who declared "Peace in Our Time" after appeasing Hitler.
Answer: (Arthur) Neville Chamberlain

3331. Son of an "Elder" PM who oversaw the end of the American Revolution.
Answer: William Pitt the Younger (do not

3332. Liberal PM who gave the Midlothian Campaign speeches and opposed Disraeli.
Answer: William Gladstone (or William Ewart [a]Gladstone)

3333. De facto first PM, in power during the beginning of the War of the Austrian Succession.
Answer: Robert Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford

3334. Conservative who ratified the treaty to join the European Union.
Answer: John Major

3335. Conservative successor of Churchill who resigned after bungling the Suez Crisis.
Answer: Anthony Eden, 1st Earl of Avon (or Robert Anthony Eden)

3336. Political scientist and writer of The Prince who was tortured and exiled from Florence.
Answer: Niccolò Machiavelli (or Niccolò di Bernardo dei Machiavelli)

3337. Banking family, with members like Cosimo and Lorenzo, who ruled Florence.
Answer: de' Medici (or House of Medici)

3338. Region in which Florence is located, named for an Italian people of antiquity.
Answer: Tuscany (or Toscana

3339. 11th century dogmatic split which the 15th century Council of Florence aimed to mend.
Answer: Great Schism (or Schism of 1054)

3340. Large-scale burning of fine arts and other objects considered lewd by the followers of Savonarola [[sah-voh-nah-ROH-lah]].
Answer: Bonfire of the Vanities (or Falò delle vanità)

3341. Sculptor who won a competition to design the title fixture for the Florence Cathedral's dome.
Answer: Filippo Brunelleschi [[broo-nuh-LES-kee]] (

3342. Revolt of 14th century wool workers which nearly toppled the sitting government.
Answer: Ciompi [[chee-AHM-pee]] Revolt

3343. Nomadic tribe whose Yuan Dynasty was overthrown by the native Ming emperors.
Answer: Mongols (or Mongolians)

3344. Northern city, formerly called Dadu, which they established as their capital.
Answer: Beijing (or Peking)

3345. Semi-nomadic people group who overthrew them and established the Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty.
Answer: Manchus

3346. Eunuch and Chinese admiral who commanded the Ming Treasure fleets.
Answer: Zheng He [[ZHUNG HUH]] (or Cheng Ho

3347. European religious order for whom Matteo Ricci [[REE-chee]] and Francis Xavier led missions to Ming China.
Answer: Jesuits (

3348. Material mass-produced at the Jingdezhen [[JING-DEH-ZHEN]] kilns for export to Europe.
Answer: Ceramics (

3349. "Crisis" caused by the capture of the sitting Ming Emperor, Yingzhong, by the Oirats [[OY-RAHTS]].
Answer: Tumu Crisis

3350. Isolationist policy which banned non-government-sanctioned sea trade, first instituted by the Hongwu Emperor.
Answer: Haijin (

3351. This deity was worshipped in Sparta under an epithet that translates to "Willow-Bound." This deity, dubbed "of the Golden Shaft" was a patron of childbirth despite her personal (+) chastity. Though this goddess's main cult centers were at Brauron [[BRAW-rahn]] and her birthplace of Delos, a temple dedicated to this deity at Ephesus [[eh-FEH-soos]] was one of the Seven (*) Ancient Wonders of the World. For ten points, name this twin sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.
Answer: Artemis (

3352. This river was originally termed the "River of Good Omens" by Vasco da Gama, though it was quickly re-dubbed the Cuama [[KWAH-muh]]. The Caprivi [[kah-PREE- vee]] Strip in (+) Namibia was created to give the German Empire access to this river during the Scramble for Africa. This river was first charted by David Livingstone, who traversed its course to Victoria Falls. (*) Once occupied by the Mutapa [[moo-TAH-pah]] Empire, for ten points, what fourth-longest river in Africa today provides the border between Zambia and Zimbabwe?
Answer: Zambezi River (

3353. The loser of this battle sent his Imperial Guard to capture La Haye Sainte and Plancenoit [[PLAHN-sen-NWAH]] but was later pushed back by Foot Guards under Sir Peregrine (+) Maitland. After his Prussians were defeated at the Battle of Ligny [[leen- YEE]], two days before this battle, Gebhard von Blücher [[BLOO-kuh]] withdrew north to (*) Wavre [[WAHV]]. For ten points, name this 1815 battle at which the Seventh Coalition led by the Duke of Wellington ensured the final defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte.
Answer: Battle of Waterloo (

3354. One group who performed this art form premiered their first piece, Le Pavillon d'Armide [[luh pah-vee-YOHN dar-MEED]], in Paris in 1909, following it up with Prince Igor, both of which were choreographed by Michel Fokine [[mee-SHEL foh-KEEN]]. (+) Sergei Diaghilev [[de-AH-guh-lef]] founded an influential Russian company known for this art form, music for which included The Firebird and The Rite of Spring by Igor (*) Stravinsky. For ten points, name this art form of performative dance, practiced by Anna Pavlova and Vaslav Nijinsky.
Answer: Ballet (

3355. Exposure to the chemical Pyridostigmine [["pie"-rih-doh-STIG-meen]] Bromide led to this war's namesake "syndrome," a debilitating chronic illness common among U.S. (+) veterans. The end of this war's hostilities have partially been attributed to photos released of the Highway of Death. This month-long war used the codename Desert Storm. The invasion of (*) Kuwait by Iraq triggered, for ten points, what U.S.-led invasion during the George H.W. Bush administration?
Answer: First Persian Gulf War (

3356. The prevalence of these people led the citizens of Sarawak to crown the "White Rajah" James Brooke after he agreed to drive them out of the nation. Until their decline after the Treaty of Gyehae [["guy"-HAY]], a group of these people called the Wokou (+) plagued the Ming Dynasty. Julius Caesar was captured and ransomed by Cilician [[sih- LIH-shun]] men in this profession, whom he later crucified for their crimes. (*) For ten points, name this profession characterized by robbery and extortion via ship.
Answer: Pirates (

3357. In this province, the Solidarity Coalition led by Jack Munro led a general strike in the early 1980s made up of 100,000 strikers. The Tsimshian [[sihm-SHE-ahn]] people of this province built totem poles and hosted potlach [[POT-latch]] (+) ceremonies. The term "Fifty-Four Forty or Fight'' concerned the border dispute between the Oregon territory and this modern province. Royal Navy officer George Vancouver names (*) the largest city of, for ten points, what Canadian province?
Answer: British Columbia (

3358. Using the codename Bolek, this man likely informed on his fellow workingmen regarding dissident matters such as listening to Radio Free Europe. This electrician led a strike of (+) 17,000 workers at the Lenin Shipyards in Gdansk [[guh-DANSK]]. This man achieved semi-free elections following the Round Table Agreements held in Warsaw. The leader of the trade union (*) Solidarity was, for ten points, what first president of a democratic Poland?
Answer: Lech Wałęsa [[LEK vah-WEHN-sah]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

3359. This thinker claimed that human motivation was divided between eros and thanatos, or the life and death drives. This man divided the title constructs into manifest and latent content in his The Interpretation of Dreams. This thinker divided the unconscious into the ego, superego, and the id. Controversially claiming that young men develop an Oedipal [[ED-ih- "pull"]] complex, for ten points, which Austrian psychologist is considered the father of psychoanalysis?
Answer: Sigmund Freud (or Sigismund Schlomo Freud)

3360. An island in this nation owned by naval officer William Owen was named by him Campobello in an effort to gain favor with the sitting royal governor, Lord William Campbell. The former mining town of Uranium City and many oil sands drilling sites are on the shore of this country's Lake Athabasca [[AH-thah-BAH-skah]]. In this nation, the SS Mont Blanc's collision with the SS Imo led to the deadly "Halifax Explosion" during the First World War. For ten points, name this North American country whose major cities include Ottawa and Montreal.
Answer: Canada

3361. The story of this opera was adapted for a 1998 musical of the same name with music by Elton John. An original "potpourri" overture was written for this opera, though it was cut from the 1871 premiere in Cairo. At the end of this opera, the title Ethiopian princess dies in the arms of her lover Radamès [[rah-dah-MESS]], while priests sing hymns to Ptah. For ten points, name this four-act opera by Giuseppe Verdi about a romantic tragedy in the Old Kingdom of Egypt.
Answer: Aida

3362. In an effort to capture bridges along this river, Operation Lumberjack was launched by the 1st Army under Courtney Hodges. The Nazi codename for the Ardennes Counteroffensive was "Operation Watch on [this river]." Following the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire, Napoleon Bonaparte created a "Confederation" of German states named for this river. Much of the Franco-German border is formed by, for ten points, what European river connected via canal to the Danube?
Answer: Rhine River

3363. In 1982, two laid-off Chrysler workers killed a man of this ethnic group in Highland Park, Michigan due to their anger at their company being outcompeted by the Japanese auto industry. This people group, who were killed en masse in the Rock Springs Massacre, experienced California's discriminatory Anti-Coolie Act. An 1882 "Exclusion Act" was passed to limit immigration by, for ten points, what Asian ethnic group, many of whom immigrated during the late Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty?
Answer: Chinese-Americans (

3364. Two students from this institution began the St. Scholastica Day Riot after being served poor quality wine. Rhodes Scholars are given full-rides to this university, which initially grew after Henry II banned his countrymen from attending the University of Paris. Following the 1209 lynching of two students from this institution, many scholars left to found its rival, Cambridge. For the point, name this university, the oldest in the English-speaking world.
Answer: University of Oxford (

3365. One of these people was convicted in the case Tuckiar v The King after killing a police constable who assaulted the women of his tribe in Arnhem's Land. Turn-of-the-century laws in New South Wales and the Northern Territory allowed for the removal of the children of these people, collectively known as the Stolen Generations. In 1985, ownership of the site Uluru was given back to, for ten points, what indigenous people of Australia?
Answer: Aboriginal Australians (or Aborigines)

3366. American explorer Gene Savoy proved that this site and the legendary capital of Manco Yupanqui [[yoo-PAHN-kee]] Vilcabamba were distinct locales. A sun dial served as the centerpiece of this estate's Temple of Inti. This site, whose name translates to "old peak" in Quechua [[KEH-chwah]], likely served as the private estate of the Sapa Pachacuti. Hiram Bingham discovered, for ten points, what Incan citadel in the Andes of modern Peru?
Answer: Machu Picchu

3367. A "Cantata" named for this river was written to commemorate a heroic last stand by fishermen near its Hukou [[HOO-KOO]] Waterfall. With Hou Ji [[HOH-JEE]], the semi-mythical Emperor Yu the Great stopped this river from flooding by using self-expanding soil called Xirang [[ZHEE-RAHNG]]. The Sui [[SWEE]] Dynasty began the construction of the Grand Canal, connecting this river and the Yangtze River. For the point, name this "Mother River" of China, named for the color of its muddy water.
Answer: Yellow River (or Huáng hé [[HWAHNG HUH]])

3368. A mayor in this nation, Arturas Zuokas [[zoo-OH-kuss]], fought illegal parking in his city by crushing a car with an armored vehicle in 2011. This nation's language was preserved through the 19th-century "Book Smuggling" movement after Tsarist Russia banned its use. This modern state merged with a southern neighbor in the Union of Lublin, and it joined Estonia and Latvia in the anti-Soviet Singing Revolution. For ten points, name this Baltic state that formed a historical Commonwealth with Poland.
Answer: Republic of Lithuania (

3369. The White Army-aligned Alasha Orda controlled this modern nation's area for three years before surrendering to the USSR. The Soviet Space Program launched the Vostok missions from this country's Baikonur [[BYE-koh-noor]] Cosmodrome. The Russian-led Commonwealth of Independent States was established by an agreement signed in this nation known as the Almaty Protocol. Nursultan Nazarbayev [[nah-zar-BYE-eff]] once ruled, for ten points, what former Soviet republic in Central Asia?
Answer: Republic of Kazakhstan (or Qazaqstan Respublikasy

3370. The Lorentz transformation was confirmed by tests of this theory, including the Ives- Stilwell Experiment and the Kennedy-Thorndike Experiment. This theory's development introduced terms into physics such as spacetime and time dilation and helped scientists predict gravitational waves and black holes. For ten points, give this shared name of two interrelated theories by Albert Einstein, divided into "general" and "special" types, that applies to all physical phenomena in the absence of gravity.
Answer: Relativity (

3371. Ganymede, the cup-bearer to Zeus, was the son of this city's founder. This city in Dardania was the site of the Palladium, and its king, Laomedon [[lay-AH-meh-don]], was killed after refusing to give a herd of magical horses to Herakles. Years later, this city was sacked thanks to the trickery of Odysseus, leading to the death of its last king, Priam [[PRY- am]]. Lying near the River Scamander, for ten points, what Anatolian city-state was the subject of a ten-year war fought over a woman named Helen?
Answer: Troy (

3372. Transfer of footballers within this entity was the subject of the 1995 Bosman ruling. This entity is derived from an earlier "Coal and Steel Community" and was formally established by the 1992 Maastricht Treaty. In 2016, the United Kingdom voted in a referendum to leave this body, an act known as "Brexit." For ten points, name this political and economic association of countries from the namesake continent.
Answer: European Union (or EU) BONUS: The United Kingdom is so far the only

3373. At the urging of Muhammad Ali, this man publicly denounced the Vietnam War in a speech delivered at the Riverside Church in New York City. During this man’s controversial “Poor People’s Campaign,” he went to the Mason Temple to deliver an address entitled “I’ve Been to the Mountaintop.” For ten points, name this first president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference who delivered a speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, declaring, “I Have a Dream.”
Answer: Martin Luther King Jr. (

3374. This dynasty established hegemony after Emperor Tang won the Battle of Mingtiao [[MING-TYAO]] during the first "Noble Revolution" in East Asian history. This dynasty made its capital the city of Yin, near modern Anyang. During this dynasty, mystics began using turtle shells, or "oracle bones," for divination. Following the Battle of Muye [[MOO-YUH]], the Zhou [[ZHOH]] overthrew, for ten points, what Chinese dynasty, the first with extensive archaeological records?
Answer: Shang Dynasty (or Shāngcháo

3375. Cassius Dio reported that four of these people were wrongfully executed in a trial brought about by Caracalla on charges of crimen incesti [[KRIH-men in-KEH-stee]]. Emperor Elagabalus [[eh-lah-GAH-bah-lus]] caused controversy after marrying Aquilia Severa, one of these people. The mother of Romulus and Remus, Rhea Silvia, legendarily served as one of these priestesses. For ten points, name these "Virgin" priestesses of Rome dedicated to the goddess of the hearth.
Answer: Vestal Virgins (

3376. The critical success of Giacomo Meyerbeer's [[MY-ah-BEH-yuhs]] work Le prophète [[luh-proh-FET]] led this former benefactor of his to publish the anti-Semitic treatise Jewishness in Music. King Ludwig of Bavaria brought this composer to Munich, and under his patronage he premiered the opera Tristan und Isolde. For ten points, name this 19th-century German composer who created the mythologically-inspired Ring cycle.
Answer: Richard Wagner [[REE-kard VAHG-nuh]] (or Wilhelm Richard Wagner) BONUS: Franz Liszt [["LEEST"]] and Richard Wagner led the "New German School" of what musical style, characterized by individualistic orientation and a glorification of nature and the past? Romanticism (

3377. Economically powerful minority whose subsets include the Hokkien and Cantonese people.
Answer: Chinese-Malaysians (

3378. Majority faith which was first adopted in the 14th century.
Answer: Islam (

3379. Capital which was occupied by Japan for much of World War Two.
Answer: Kuala Lumpur

3380. Wealthy city-state which was expelled in 1965.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

3381. Powerful medieval state which shares its name with a "Strait" separating the Malay peninsula from Sumatra.
Answer: Sultanate of Malacca

3382. Neighbor who annexed its northern reaches during World War Two as a member of the Japanese Co-Prosperity Sphere.
Answer: Kingdom of Thailand (or Siam)

3383. Region which, with North Borneo and Malaya, united in the 1960s to make-up the nation.
Answer: Sarawak

3384. Indonesia-Malaysia War in Borneo which started due to Sukarno's opposition to the formation of Malaysia.
Answer: Konfrontasi

3385. Viking-settled region of northern France ruled by William the Conqueror.
Answer: Normandy (or Normanz)

3386. Explorer who landed in modern Newfoundland in a place he called Vinland.
Answer: Leif Erikson

3387. General term for their raiding vessels, with Drakkar and Skeid [[SKEED]] varieties.
Answer: Longships

3388. Empire using an elite infantry made predominantly of Vikings known as the Varangian Guard.
Answer: Byzantine Empire (

3389. Norse king whose death at Stamford Bridge against Harold Godwinson left only two claimants to the English crown.
Answer: Harald Hadrada (or Harald III

3390. Alphabet they used to write Old Norse, often found on namesake "Stones."
Answer: Runes (or Runestones

3391. Danish prince and king of England who created the North Sea Empire following the death of Sven Forkbeard.
Answer: Cnut the Great (or Canute the Great)

3392. Englishman and scholar in the court of Charlemagne who recounted the first major Viking raid at the Abbey of Lindisfarne.
Answer: Alcuin [[AL-kyoo-in]] of York

3393. So-called "caliphate" which controlled much of Eastern Syria in the mid-2010s.
Answer: ISIL (or ISIS

3394. U.S. president who first called for strategic airstrikes in Syria in 2014.
Answer: Barack Obama (or Barack Hussein Obama II)

3395. Family of Ba'ath politicians including Hafez and Bashar, who presided over the government forces during the Civil War.
Answer: al-Assad

3396. Turkish president who committed ground forces to the war in the mid-2010s.
Answer: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[EHR-doh-wahn]]

3397. Syrian city whose Great Mosque was levelled following a four year-long battle.
Answer: Aleppo (or Halab)

3398. Lebanese militant faction and political party which sent both ground forces and convoys of weapons.
Answer: Hezbollah (or Ḥizbu 'llāh)

3399. Kurdish militia first formed during the Rojava campaign who are seen as terrorists by Turkey.
Answer: People's Defense Units (or People's Protection Units

3400. A fake story suggested Ronald Reagan was intended to play the lead in this historical fiction movie. This film was released early to capitalize on free press from Operation (+) Torch, the allied invasion of North Africa. This movie ends with Louis suggesting he join the Free French with Rick Blaine, who states, "I think this is the beginning of a (*) beautiful friendship." For ten points, what Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman Best Picture winner is named for a Moroccan city?
Answer: Casablanca

3401. The poor reception of an epic poem titled for this group led to the expulsion of Apollonius [[ah-poh-LOH-nee-us]] from the isle of Rhodes. At the request of King Pelias [[peh-LEE-ahs]], this group travelled to the homeland of Medea in (+) the historical Kingdom of Colchis [[KOHL-kiss]]. The warrior who slayed the Minotaur, Theseus, was a member of this group, alongside (*) Meleager and Orpheus. For ten points, name this group led by Jason who set sail to find the Golden Fleece.
Answer: Argonauts (

3402. This location was first discovered by a European when Portuguese explorer Vicente Pegado went searching for gold between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers. This African (+) citadel likely served as the western terminus of a trade route that reached the Swahili Coast and extended to medieval China. The Shona (*) people built, for the point, what ancient city which shares its name with a southern African nation governed from Harare [huh-RAH-reh]]?
Answer: Great Zimbabwe

3403. A Christian from this city named Anselm proposed the first ontological argument in his work Proslogion [[proh-SLOH-gee-on]]. Henry the Young King unknowingly ordered the 1170 execution (+) of a church official from this city. Following the reforms of King Henry VIII [[the eighth]], the spiritual leader of Anglicanism is the archbishop of this city. Thomas à Becket served (*) as the archbishop of, for ten points, what English city which names a set of Middle English Tales?
Answer: Canterbury (

3404. This type of government was established following the successive overthrow of Hippias [[HIP-ee-us]] and the Spartan-favoring oligarchy of Isagoras [[iss- ah-GOH- russ]] in favor of Cleisthenes's [[KLYS-thin-eez-is]] reforms. This (+) government style, for which Solon laid the foundations, included a punishment called ostracism, and was available to all citizens, though that excluded women and (*) slaves. For ten points, name this isonomic government style that was adopted by ancient Athens, in which citizens governed themselves directly.
Answer: Athenian Democracy (

3405. This man, who advocated for the "Five Races under One Union" policy, incorporated his own Methodist beliefs into his "New Life Movement." This man perpetrated the April 12th Purge of Communists (+) and other workers led by Zhou Enlai [[ZHOH EN-"LIE"]]. This man's National Revolutionary Party formed the United Front with Mao's Red Army to (*) defend against the Japanese. For ten points, name this "Generalissimo" of Nationalist China who fled to Taiwan in the 1940s.
Answer: Chiang Kai-shek (

3406. Albert Einstein proved this statement using dissection without rearrangement, and James A. Garfield proved this statement using a trapezoid. For a Cartesian coordinate plane, the (+) Euclidean distance formula can be derived from this statement. A Babylonian tablet called Plimpton 322 is the oldest known record of (*) "triples" derived from this theorem that include examples such as (3,4,5) and (5,12,13). For ten points, what is this formula stated as "A squared plus B squared equals C squared," named from a Greek philosopher?
Answer: Pythagorean theorem (or Pythagoras's theorem

3407. In this year, England returned all continental possessions to the French, save Calais [[kah-LAY]], in the Peace of Étaples [[eh-TAHPL]]. The Jewish people of Spain were expelled or forced to convert in the Alhambra Decree (+) of this year, passed by Ferdinand and Isabella. In this year, the settlement of "La Navidad" was founded after the ship Santa Maria ran aground on Hispaniola. Christopher Columbus unintentionally (*) "discovered" the New World in, for ten points, what 15th century year?
Answer: 1492

3408. General Washington advocated for the John Hancock-led Second Continental Congress to pass a 1777 inoculation order against this disease for all new recruits to the Continental Army. During the Siege of Fort Pitt, William Trent likely fabricated an account of giving blankets ridden (+) with this disease to the Delaware tribe. The World Health Organization announced the 1979 eradication (*) of, for ten points, which disease caused by strains of variola?
Answer: Smallpox (

3409. These people, who subjugated the Avvites, established a so-called "Pentapolis," a group of five cities built on the Road of Horus, including their cultural center at Ashkelon. Scholars have speculated that the "Peleset," a (+) subset of the Sea Peoples, are these Semitic people, who were later repopulated in Canaan by Ramesses. King David legendarily (*) defeated, for ten points, what people's champion, Goliath, in single combat in a Biblical tale?
Answer: Philistines (

3410. British philosopher G.E. Moore wrote a famous "defense of" this phrase that inspired his later "Proof of an External World." This phrase titles a pamphlet that argues it is absurd for an island to rule a continent and which advocates for replacing the Magna Carta with a Continental Charter. For ten points, give this two word phrase that titles a Thomas Paine pamphlet advocating for American independence, a term which indicates obviously correct beliefs.
Answer: Common Sense (

3411. The geology concept known as stratigraphy was applied to this science by Danish antiquarian Christian Jürgensen Thomsen. William Cunnington, a founding father of this science, conducted a series of expeditions to Wiltshire, where he recorded findings in barrows. Notable developments in this science include the discoveries of Hissarlik in Turkey and Mycenae [[my-SEE-nee]] in Greece by Heinrich Schliemann [[SHLEE-mahn]]. For ten points, name this science which conducts excavations of ancient sites.
Answer: Archaeology (

3412. This period began after Visigothic nobleman Pelayo [[peh-LY-oh]] rebelled against Governor Munuza, establishing the Kingdom of Asturias. Large parias tributes were paid during this period, which began with the Battle of Covadonga. This period included a victory over the Almohads at Las Navas de Tolosa, and this period ended with the conquest of Granada by the Catholic monarchs of Castile and Aragon. For ten points, name this period in which the Iberian peninsula was "reclaimed" from Muslim kingdoms.
Answer: Reconquista

3413. A play in this genre depicts the general Cleon as a slave to Demos, whose affections are vied for by a sausage-seller named Agoracritus [[ah-gor-AH-krih-tus]]. Menander [[meh- NAN-der]] worked in the "Athenian New" school of this genre, whereas its "Old" form is seen in plays like The Knights and The Clouds by Aristophanes, who made fun of Socrates. For ten points, name this lighthearted and often satirical ancient Greek genre of plays, contrasted with Tragedy.
Answer: Comedy (

3414. Josephus [[joh-SEE-fus]] claimed this monarch led a futile thirteen-year siege of Tyre [["TIRE"]], later coming to terms with its king, Ithobaal III [[ith-oh-BALE "the third"]]. This restorer of the Ishtar Gate supposedly blinded the king of Judah, Zedekiah, for rebelling against his rule. In the biblical tradition, this Chaldean [[kahl-DEE-un]] king cast Shadrach [[SHAD-rak]], Meshach [[MEE-shak]], and Abednego [[ah-BED-neh-go]] into the fiery furnace and had his dreams interpreted by Daniel. For ten points, name this long-reigning king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire.
Answer: Nebuchadnezzar [[neh-buh-kahd-NEH-zar]] II (or Nabû-kudurri-uṣur

3415. In 1992, this modern nation invaded its eastern neighbor in an attempt to protect the independence of the region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Talaat Pasha ordered forced marches through the Syrian Desert by this nation's namesake ethnic group, killing over one million of them. Multiple wars with Azerbaijan have been fought by, for ten points, what Caucasian nation that faced a 20th century "Genocide" under the Ottoman Empire?
Answer: Republic of Armenia (or Hayastani Hanrapetut’yun

3416. Along with acting as watchmen, freedmen known as vigiles [[VIH-jih-less]] worked in this profession, often using a substance called acetum [[AH-keh-tum]]. Men in this profession in Ancient Greece used ox intestines as a flexible hose. The first brigade of these people in Rome notoriously refused to do their job until distressed citizens negotiated with Crassus over the sale of their homes for minimal prices. For ten points, name this profession held by people who put out blazes.
Answer: Firefighters (

3417. In this city's Congress of Peace, it was determined that the Holy See should have its sovereignty revoked. The League of Nations headquarters was moved from London to this neutral city in 1920, remaining so until the League's dissolution. French reformer John Calvin led a semi-theocratic government in this city during the 16th century. A convention that regulates the rules of war is named for, for ten points, what Swiss city?
Answer: Geneva (

3418. A memorial to honor soldiers killed while serving on these vessels was built by the War Graves Commission. The first time these weapons were used in World War One resulted in the sinking of the HMS Pathfinder. One of these vessels under the command of Iron Cross winner Otto Weddigen [[VEH-dih-gehn]] sank the so-called "Live Bait Squadron" in a single hour. For ten points, identify these naval submarines operated by the German Empire during the First and Second World Wars.
Answer: U-Boats (

3419. While head of the Provisional Theatre, Bedřich Smetana [[BED-ur-zhik SMEH-tah- nah]] returned this composer's first draft of the historical comedy King and Charcoal Burner after declaring it unperformable. His time in Iowa among fellow Central Europeans led to this composer writing the American Quartet. African-American spirituals influenced this man's composition, Symphony from the New World. Bohemian folk music often inspired, for ten points, which Czech composer's Slavonic Dances?
Answer: Antonín Dvořák [[deh-VOR-zhak]] (or Antonín Leopold Dvořák)

3420. The Barbar Temple in modern Bahrain is dedicated to a god of this domain, the Sumerian deity Enki. Duringearly conversion efforts, Spanish colonists equated the biblical episode of the "Binding of Isaac" to instances of child-sacrifice to the Aztec god of this domain, Tlaloc. The citizens of Athens supposedly rejected the gift of a god of this domain, which took the form of a spring. For ten points, name this primary domain ruled by Poseidon.
Answer: Water (

3421. This disease's primary vector of transport was discovered by Paul-Louis Simond [[see-MOHND]] while in Bombay during its "third" major breakout. The most prominent symptom of this disease is the inflammation of lymph nodes in the groin, neck, and armpits. This disease is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis, and historically spread through black rats carrying fleas aboard merchant vessels. For ten points, name this disease that killed about one third of the European population in a pandemic called the Black Death.
Answer: Bubonic Plague (

3422. The only known source of the Safaitic [[sah-fah-IH-tik]] language is from this kind of art piece. There are several ancient Roman examples of this art form found in Pompeii, often accompanied by lewd jokes. The use of stencils for this art form developed in France in the 1980s. Commercialized by artists such as Banksy, for ten points, what generally unsanctioned art typically takes the form of writing or drawing on a wall or some other surface?
Answer: Graffiti (or Graffito

3423. Though the earliest form of this science is seen in the 6th century BC morphology studies of Indian philosopher Panini, this field's modern form dates to Ferdinand de Saussure's [[sow-SOORS]] insistence on synchronic analysis to distinguish it from philology. Jacob Grimm wrote the first work in this field for German, which exhaustively codified its grammar. Dealing with concepts like syntax and semantics, for ten points, what science is the study of languages?
Answer: Linguistics (

3424. This regime's Admiral of the Fleet was assassinated by royalist Fernand de la Chapelle, who hoped to place Henry VI [[the sixth]] on the throne. As a result of Case Anton, this regime's naval secretary Gabriel Auphan [[oh-FAHN]] scuttled its fleet at Toulon [[too- LOHN]]. This state facilitated "round-ups," like at Vel' d'Hiv [[VEL DEEV]], to deport Jews to Nazi camps. For ten points, name this collaborationist regime of France during World War Two, led by Philippe Petain [[peh-TAHN]].
Answer: Vichy France (or Régime de Vichy

3425. A 1921 conference in this city installed the Hashemite [[HASH-eh-mite]] monarchy in Jordan. A 1943 conference in this city added China to the "Big Four" powers and involved Chiang Kai-Shek, Winston Churchill, and Franklin Roosevelt. At a 1981 parade in this city, Khalid al-Islambouli [[is-lahm-BOO-lee]] of the Islamic Jihad movement assassinated Anwar Sadat. For ten points, name this largest metro area in the Arab world, a Nile River city that is the capital of Egypt.
Answer: Cairo (or al-Qahirah) BONUS: Sadat was assassinated for agreeing to peace with Israel in this

3426. Near the Westfjords of Iceland, thirty sailors from this region were massacred for being foreigners. In Operation Ogre, the ETA separatist organization, agitating for the freedom of this region, killed Luis Carrero Blanco. The historical Kingdom of Navarre [[nah- VAHR]] was in this region, centered on the city of Pamplona. The city of Bilbao is located in, for ten points, what autonomous region of Northern Spain?
Answer: Basque Country (or Euskadi; or País Vasco

3427. The splinter group ISWAP launched an invasion of this organization's headquarters during the Battle of Sambisa [[sam-BEE-sah]] Forest, leading to the death of this group's leader, Abubakar Shekau [[ah-boo-BAH-ker sheh-KOW]], by suicide vest. This organization, whose name usually translates to "Western Education is Forbidden," attempted to scare civilians by kidnapping 200 school girls in Chibok. Al-Qaeda has materially supported, for ten points, which Nigerian terrorist organization?
Answer: Boko Haram (

3428. California city levelled by a 1906 earthquake.
Answer: San Francisco

3429. 2005 Category-5 Hurricane which broke the levees of New Orleans.
Answer: Hurricane Katrina

3430. Partially human-caused disaster during the Great Depression in which sandstorms ravaged the Western U.S.
Answer: Dust Bowl

3431. State whose Galveston Hurricane of 1900 was the deadliest natural disaster in U.S. history.
Answer: Texas

3432. Volcano in the Cascades whose 1980 eruption caused deadly mudslides that reached the Columbia River.
Answer: Mount Saint Helens (or Lawetlat'la)

3433. 2017 Hurricane which left denizens of Puerto Rico without power for years.
Answer: Hurricane Maria

3434. Late-19th century Pennsylvania flood caused by the failure of the South Fork Dam.
Answer: Johnstown Flood (or Great Flood of

3435. Town in Missouri where a series of 1811 and 1812 earthquakes led to increased support for Tecumseh's Confederacy.
Answer: New Madrid Earthquakes

3436. City which fought with Rome at the Battle of Cape Ecnomus during the First Punic War.
Answer: Carthage (

3437. Maritime civilization that founded cities like Tyre and Sidon, and who developed the earliest-known alphabet.
Answer: Phoenicians

3438. Mediterranean island whose harbor was adorned with an ancient colossus representing Helios.
Answer: Rhodes (or Rhodos)

3439. Island on which the proto-Greek palace city of Knossos was built.
Answer: Crete (

3440. Naval battle which ended Xerxes's invasion of Greece in 480 BC.
Answer: Battle of Salamis [[SAL-ah-miss]]

3441. Boarding device named for "crows" used by the Romans during the First Punic War.
Answer: Corvus

3442. Greek ships which served a military and merchant purpose and later evolved into the bireme, named for having 50 oars.
Answer: Penteconter

3443. Kingdom in modern Somalia that heavily traded with its northwestern neighbor, Egypt.
Answer: Kingdom of Punt (or Pwenet

3444. General who exercised control over Ottoman Egypt for a short time following the Battle of the Pyramids.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

3445. Colonial power and historical rival of France that almost went to war following the Fashoda Incident.
Answer: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (

3446. Large island nation that fell under French control after the downfall of the Merina Kingdom.
Answer: Madagascar (or Madagasikara)

3447. Kingdom which became a French protectorate following the Treaty of Fes.
Answer: Kingdom of Morocco (or al-mamlaka al-maḡribiyya)

3448. North African nation whose FLN fought a civil war with the French in the 1950s and 1960s.
Answer: People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (or al-Jumhūriyya [/a]al-Jazāʾiriyya[/a] ad-Dīmuqrāṭiyya aš-Šaʿbiyya)

3449. Horn of Africa nation and neighbor to Ethiopia once known as French Somaliland.
Answer: Republic of Djibouti (

3450. Former West African colony whose first president, Leopold Senghor, founded the literary movement Negritude.
Answer: Republic of Senegal (or République du Sénégal)

3451. Tiny Indian Ocean island which preferred to stay a French overseas department rather than join nearby Comoros.
Answer: Mayotte

3452. A tribe who lives primarily in this region called the Pirahã [[pee-RAH-hah]] speak a language that notably lacks words for specific numbers. The Yanomami are (+) another widely-studied native group from this region. The Vale do Javari [[hah-VAH- ree]] is a massive reserve for indigenous peoples in the Brazilian (*) portion of this region. Indigenous rights and territories are threatened in, for ten points, what largest rainforest in the world?
Answer: Amazon Rainforest (

3453. The oldest still existing one of these instruments is named for Charles IX [[the ninth]] of France, who first mass-ordered them from Italy for his court musicians. The search for the most accomplished virtuoso of this instrument is held yearly during the (+) Premio Paganini in Genoa. One of these instruments named Soil, which is in the possession of Itzhak [[EET-zahk]] (*) Perlman, was created by the accomplished luthier Antonio Stradivari [[strah-dih-VAH-ree]]. For ten points, name this stringed instrument which is smaller than a viola.
Answer: Violin (

3454. The Ecclesiastical Ordinances of King Cnut [[CAH-noot]] defined certain laws so that these "madly audacious" creatures "do not too widely devastate, nor bite too many of the spiritual flock." The geographer Pausanias [[pow-SAY-nee-us]] described how King (+) Lycaon [["lie"-KAY-on]] became one of these creatures after sacrificing a child to Zeus. Modern fiction describes these monsters as being vulnerable to objects cast from (*) silver. For ten points, name these historically-feared creatures that transform into dangerous canines during the full moon.
Answer: Werewolf (or Lycanthrope

3455. In this empire, the Chaki taklla was a foot plow used by farmers due to a lack of large pack animals. This state employed chasqui [[CHAH-skee]] couriers, who kept record of transactions using the quipu [[KEE-poo]] knotted-string (+) system. This empire experienced a civil war between Huascar and Atahualpa [[ah-tah-HWAHL- pah]] prior to its conquest by the Spanish. (*) For ten points, name this Andean empire that was conquered in 1533 by Francisco Pizarro.
Answer: Incan Empire (or the Incas

3456. This politician and his wife, Lou, nursed injured soldiers in Tianjin [[TYAHN- JIN]] during the Boxer Rebellion. Douglas MacArthur ignored this president's order to halt the tear-gassing and eviction of the Bonus Army (+) camp under the guise that the veterans planned to overthrow the government. Shantytowns during the early Great Depression were named for this president. The Wall Street Crash of 1929 (*) occurred during, for ten points, what Republican's single presidential term?
Answer: Herbert Hoover (or Herbert Clark Hoover

3457. In 1910, a Russian scientist invented a synthetic form of this substance called polybutadiene [[pah-lee-BYOO-tah-deen]], made from potatoes. Bolivia and a neighboring nation signed the Treaty of Petropolis in (+) an effort to avert war over the Acre [[AH-kruh]] state, a center for this commodity. To circumvent the monopoly on this good held by British Malaya, Fordlandia was established to produce this good in Brazil. Charles Goodyear (*) developed the vulcanization of, for ten points, what natural polymer known for its elasticity?
Answer: Rubber (

3458. This archipelago's Bogoslof volcano erupted in 2017, briefly interrupting air traffic between North America and Asia. The Rat Islands, Near Islands, and Fox Islands are (+) part of this archipelago, which was known until 1867 as the Catherine Islands. This group's islands of Kiska and Attu were occupied by Japan during World War Two. Unalaska is the (*) most populous community in, for ten points, what group of islands southwest of the Alaskan Peninsula?
Answer: Aleutian Islands (or Aleuts

3459. A composer from this nation dedicated the piece Anchor and Star to its navy following the outbreak of war with Imperial Germany. This nation's entrance into the Second World War inspired the composition of Fanfare for the Common Man by Aaron Copland. (+) This nation's native composer John Adams created the piece On the Transmigration of Souls in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks here. John Philip Sousa composed Stars and Stripes (*) Forever to serve as a military march for, for ten points, which Western nation?
Answer: United

3460. This battle occurred concurrently with Operation Stösser [[STUH-suh]], which reportedly called for the use of carrier pigeons. During a siege at this battle, one commander responded to a surrender demand by simply replying (+) "Nuts!" Also known as the Ardennes Counteroffensive, this battle is considered the last roll of the dice for Adolf Hitler. (*) For ten points, name this World War Two battle which is named for a distinct shape in Allied lines.
Answer: The Battle of the Bulge (

3461. It's not Italy, but under King Hassan II, this country's "Years of Lead" saw extreme political repression. This country's Alaouite [[ah-LOO-ite]] dynasty took power in the 1600s and includes its ruler since 1999, Mohammad VI [[sixth]]. This (+) country organized the 1975 "Green March" to seize land claimed by the Spanish Polisario Front and has ongoing territorial disputes with Ceuta [[SYOO-tuh]] and Melilla [[meh-LEE-yah]], the only Spanish cities on (*) Africa's mainland. For ten points, name this country that occupies most of Western Sahara.
Answer: Kingdom of Morocco (

3462. A revolt of this force burned the Scutari Barracks due to reforms known as Nizam-I Cedid [[NEE-zahm-EE seh-DEED]], or the "New Order." In a modernization effort, this force was disbanded following the Auspicious Incident by Mahmud II. The devshirme system originally recruited young, Christian boys into this military corps, which was tasked with protecting the sultan in battle. For the point, name this elite, musket-wielding corps of Ottoman infantry.
Answer: Janissaries (or Janissary Corps

3463. This man used the cousin of Amerigo Vespucci [[veh-SPOO-chee]], Simonetta, as the model for the title nymph in The Death of Procris. Cosimo, Piero, and a young Lorenzo D' Medici all appear in this man's artwork Adoration of the Magi. This man became a fervent member of the "Weepers," followers of Friar Savonarola [[sah-voh-nah-ROH-lah]], and willingly destroyed several of his own works of art. For the point, name this artist of The Birth of Venus and Primavera.
Answer: Sandro Botticelli (or Alessandro di Mariano di Vanni Filipepi)

3464. During this period, the heretical sect of self-whipping acolytes known as the "Flagellants" peaked in popularity. One theory states this period began after Hanseatic contacts in the fur trade travelled to the Republic of Novgorod. Under Casimir the Great, the effects of this period were lessened in Poland, because the Jewish community spread hygienic practices like handwashing. Up to half of Europe's population was killed by, for the point, what 14th century blight?
Answer: Black Death (

3465. In a Kalidasa play in this language, the celestial nypmh Urvasi is turned into a vine. The likely- fictional Kaurava and Pandava families battle in the dynastic Kurukshetra [[koo-rook-SHEH-trah]] War in an epic poem in this tongue. A subset of this language, which arose in the late Bronze Age, is known for its use in the Vedas. The Ramayana and Mahabharata were written in, for the point, what ancient sacred language of the Indian subcontinent?
Answer: Sanskrit (

3466. Using the numeri auxiliary system, this general introduced Eastern mounted archers and cataphracts into the Legion. This proponent of "Strength through Peace" rebuilt the Pantheon following its partial destruction during a 114 fire. This man accepted Antoninus Pius as his successor on the condition that he appoint Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus as his heirs. A wall crossing Roman Britain was built by, for the point, which of the "Five Good Emperors"?
Answer: Hadrian (

3467. This man's forces met disaster against Marinid sultan Salah ibn Salah at the 1437 Battle of Tangiers, after which this man's brother, Ferdinand, was given as a hostage. This royal supposedly based his efforts out of a villa on the Sagres [[SAH-greesh]] peninsula, from which he funded several caravel voyages to the Bay of Arguin [[ahr-GEEN]], Madeira [[muh-DEEH-ruh]], and the Azores [[uh- ZORZ]]. For the point, name this fifteenth-century Portuguese prince, often credited with jumpstarting the Age of Exploration.
Answer: Prince Henry the Navigator (or Infante Dom Henrique, o Navegador; or Infante Dom Henrique [note: in Portuguese, "the Navigator" title is not typically attached to Henry's name])

3468. Shortly before this operation, Prime Minister Paul Reynaud [[ray-NOH]] declared Leopold III a "traitor" for surrendering after the Battle of the Lys [[LEESS]]. The Ministry of Shipping scoured the River Thames for private naval vessels to lease, later becoming known as the "Little Ships of" this operation. Winston Churchill's "We Shall Fight on the Beaches" speech called this military operation a "Miracle of Deliverance." For the point, name this "evacuation" of 300,000 Allied soldiers shortly before the Fall of France.
Answer: Dunkirk Evacuation (

3469. Protostrator Manuel Kamytzes [[kam-ITE-zeez]] harassed soldiers en route to this war while they were unable to cross from Thrace into Anatolia. During this war, the weight of his horse's armor led to the drowning of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa while crossing the Saleph [[SAH-leff]] River. Following this war's Battle of Jaffa [[JAH-fah]], Richard the Lionheart and Saladin agreed to peaceful terms. For the point, name this 12th century "Crusade" prompted by the Saracen [[SAY-ruh-sen]] capture of Jerusalem.
Answer: Third Crusade (

3470. It's not Afghanistan, but mujahideen [[moo-jah-hih-DEEN]] guerillas in this nation's Mayu Peninsula agitated for the right to be annexed by a western neighbor. Mao's support of the "Red Flags" in this nation led to its president, Ne Win, cutting off relations with China. This nation's Tatmadaw [[TAT-mad-aw]] armed forces overthrew the government of Aung San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] in 2021. The repression of the Rohingya [[row-HIN-gah]] people occurred in, for the point, what nation also known as Burma?
Answer: Myanmar (

3471. Plumber Max Hödel [[HUH-del]] attempted to kill a monarch with this name after he was expelled from the Social Democratic Party. The second ruler of this name from the House of Hohenzollern became a figurehead in the final years of his reign, conceding power to Erich Ludendorff and Paul von Hindenburg. That monarch of this name dismissed longtime chancellor Otto von Bismarck two years into his reign. The Kaiser at the beginning of World War One had, for the point, what regnal given name?
Answer: Kaiser Wilhelm (

3472. Mining rights for this substance led to a conflict between the Duke of Ferrara [[fer-RAH-rah]] and Pope Sixtus IV in a 15th-century conflict named for it. France's acquisitions from the Albigensian [[al-beh-JEN-zee-un]] Crusade led to the establishment of a crown tax named the gabelle on this substance. The Song dynasty perfected large, artificial evaporation ponds for extracting this substance. The land word salary may be derived from, for the point, what mineral used to preserve food?
Answer: Salt (

3473. A princess and a warrior from this culture were supposedly transfigured into the stratovolcanoes Popocatepl [[poh-poh-kah-TEH-pill]] and Iztaccihuatl [[ees-stah-keh-HWAH-til]]. Known as the "hand-made mountain," the abandoned Great Pyramid of Cholula was a pilgrimage site for these people. Within the "Sacred Precinct" of these people was the Templo Mayor complex, which was simultaneously dedicated to Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-zee-loh-POACH-tlee]] and Tlaloc. For the point, name this Mesoamerican people who worshiped Quetzalcoatl [[KWEH-tsuhl-KWAH-tul]] and built Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohtch-TEET-lahn]].
Answer: Aztec (

3474. This monarch's sister Berenice [[beh-reh-NEE-kay]] IV died at the hands of her father after he paid Aulus Gabinius [[OW-looss gah-BIH-nee-ooss]] to reclaim his throne. While visiting a Triumvir in Cilicia, this ruler dressed as a nude Aphrodite on a golden barge sailing down the Cydnus [[SID-nooss]] river. This mother of Caesarion supposedly killed herself with asps before being captured by Octavian. For the point, name this last Ptolemaic ruler, a queen of Egypt and paramour of Mark Antony.
Answer: Cleopatra VII Philopator

3475. The first Japanese people to visit this kingdom was the crew of the Inawaka-maru, who broke isolationist policy. Sanford Dole's provisional government succeeded this kingdom, nearly going to war with the U.S. during Black Week after planters refused to reinstate Queen Liliʻuokalani [[leh-LEE- oh-kah-LAH-nee]]. Kamehameha [[kah-MEH-hah-MEH-hah]] the Great's conquests of islands including Molokaʻi and Oahu formed, for the point, what Polynesian kingdom that was annexed into the United States?
Answer: Kingdom of Hawaii (or Hawaiian Kingdom

3476. This man openly decried the Social Democratic Party's plan to align with the Lassalleans in the "Gotha Program." While critiquing Hegel's Philosophy of Right, this thinker called faith the "Opium of the Masses." This thinker's text Theories of Surplus Value was published by his frequent collaborator, Friedrich Engels, after this man's death. Capital and The Communist Manifesto were written by, for the point, which influential 19th-century German thinker?
Answer: Karl Marx (or Karl Heinrich Marx)

3477. During this war, the carrier Oriskany nearly sank after a soldier accidentally lit a flare and threw it in a locker, causing a fire that killed 44 sailors. During this conflict, naval trawlers attempted to drop supplies to sites along the Bồ Đề [[BOH-DEH]] River including Nha Trang to get past U.S. personnel. Operation Custom Tailor was a dedicated naval bombardment of Haiphong Harbor during this war. For the point, name this 1955-1975 Southeast Asian conflict?
Answer: Vietnam War (or Chiến tranh Việt Nam)

3478. Human settlement of this country likely originated with Austronesians sailing on outrigger canoes from what is now Indonesia. Following the Franco-Hova War in this nation, Queen Ranavalona III granted the port of Diego-Suarez and the surrounding bay to France. Radama I encouraged the modernization of this nation's Malagasy [[mah-lah-GAY-see]] language by using the Latin alphabet. Lemurs are endemic to, for the point, what African island nation and former French colony?
Answer: Republic of Madagascar (Repoblikan'i Madagasikara)

3479. While extracting this commodity, peasants developed the Yangge [[YAHNG-GUH]] style of folk song during the Song Dynasty. A Taoist state ruled by the "Celestial Masters" during the Three Kingdoms period required that adherents donate "Five Pecks" of this commodity. In legend, Guan Yin gave this food to the Chinese people to end their starvation. Paddies are used to grow, for the point, what chief grain of East Asia?
Answer: Rice (

3480. This man's illegitimate son, William, served as the final colonial governor of New Jersey. This man organized the militia which halted the marauding Paxton Boys's march on Philadelphia. This diplomat, who secured French intervention in the American Revolution, also invented conventional bifocals. For the point, name this American Renaissance man and Founding Father who served as the United States's first Postmaster General.
Answer: Benjamin Franklin

3481. This nation's Almirante Brown Antarctica base was burned down by a scientist after he was ordered to stay the winter. This country's National Reorganization Process led to a period of state terrorism known as "La Guerra Sucia" [[soo-SEE-ah]], or the Dirty War. The "Shirtless Ones" dominated post-war politics of this nation under the leadership of Juan Perón. Perón ruled from Buenos Aires in, for the point, what South American nation?
Answer: Argentina (

3482. During the August Movement, this figure gave the "Do or Die" speech, advocating for an end to violent resistance during the Second World War. American vice-consul Herbert Reiner captured this man's assassin following an attack at the Birla House. The British Raj's taxes on a certain good led to this man organizing the Salt March to Dandi. The term Mahatma was bestowed upon, for the point, which Indian freedom fighter?
Answer: Mohandas Gandhi (

3483. Composer Charles Hubert Parry wrote one of these works at the behest of British Poet Laureate Robert Bridges to strengthen wartime resolve during World War One. One theory claims that the composition of one of these works began as Martin Luther entered the Diet of Worms [[DEE- et "of" VURMS]] in 1521. That work of this type is "A Mighty Fortress is Our God." The biblical Book of Psalms is a collection of these songs supposedly written by King David. For the point, name these religious songs written in adoration of God.
Answer: Hymns (

3484. It's not Bangkok, but the Dusit Thani [[DOO-sit TAH-nee]] building in this city is meant to represent hands performing a traditional Thai greeting. This city’s man-made archipelago known as “The World” remains largely undeveloped due to the 2008 financial crisis. In 2009, this city became home to the largest building in the world, the Burj Khalifa. For the point, identify this city, the namesake of one of the seven emirates that make up the UAE.
Answer: Dubai (or Dubayy)

3485. One of these structures named for Emperor Domitian inspired the Statius [[STAY-shee-us]] poem The Elements of Balance. The Quattuorviri [[KWAH-twohr-VEE-ree]] was a quartet of magistrates appointed by the Republic who oversaw the maintenance of these structures. The cursus publicus was a courier system under Augustus which used these constructs to quickly deliver mail. Rome and Brundisium were connected by, for the point, what type of construct known as the Via Appia?
Answer: Roads (

3486. An early musical component added to this genre by Afro-Creole musician "Jelly Roll" Morton was known as the "Spanish Tinge." Ornette Coleman was an early pioneer of this genre's "Free" form, releasing The Shape of [this genre] to Come in the late 1950s. The interwar years in the United States are sometimes known as "The Age of" this musical style. For the point, name this improvisational genre of music whose practitioners include Miles Davis and Duke Ellington.
Answer: Jazz (

3487. This monarch names the North American theatre of the Nine Years' War, a conflict ended by the 1701 Treaty of Ryswick. The Immortal Seven sent a request to this stadtholder to seize control of one kingdom. The Jacobites, who sought to restore James II, were defeated by this man's army at the Battle of the Boyne. The husband of Queen Mary was, for the point, which Dutch nobleman from the House of Orange who was bestowed the English throne during the Glorious Revolution?
Answer: William of Orange (

3488. Under this fixture is a chapel dedicated to the patron saint of one nation, Our Lady Revealed, who supposedly appeared before three fishermen near the Paraiba [[pah-RYE-bah]] river. This figure, built to combat “an advancing tide of Godlessness,” had much of its funding raised through the Semana do Monumento. This Philipp Landowski-designed statue sits atop Corcovado Mountain. For the point, name this massive statue of Jesus in Rio de Janeiro.
Answer: Christ the Redeemer (or Cristo Redentor)

3489. The Naryshkin family supported this ruler at a young age, stopping his sister-regent Sophia from usurping power from him. This man's reign was followed by the so-called "half-tsar," Alexander Menshikov, who dominated the reign of Catherine I. His tall stature and thick accent led to this tsar being easily recognized during his incognito "Grand Embassy" of Europe. The Empire of Russia was modernized by, for the point, what "Great" tsar?
Answer: Peter I (or Peter the Great

3490. This politician's namesake "Doctrine" allowed for Middle Eastern nations to directly request American military and financial aid. This president's Farewell Address warned of the growing Military-Industrial Complex and large-scale deficit spending. This man's time in occupied Germany and visit to the Autobahn inspired his promotion of the Interstate Highway System. For the point, name this general-turned-president in the 1950s, nicknamed "Ike."
Answer: Dwight D(avid) "Ike" Eisenhower

3491. A self-taught weapon designer from this nation, Aimo Lahti, created the anti-tank "Elephant Gun," though it proved unable to penetrate T-34s. To prevent the USSR from using radio-controlled explosives, this nation's military played four months of non-stop polka during the Continuation War. This nation built a ring of fortifications known as the Mannerheim Line to defend the Karelian Isthmus. The Winter War was fought against the Soviets by, for the point, what Scandinavian nation?
Answer: Republic of Finland (or Suomen tasavalta

3492. In this year, much of the Jewish population of Granada was massacred following a plan by the Jewish vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela to betray the city to a rival taifa [[tah-EE-fah]]. In this year, the Earl of Orkney provided shelter to the Norwegians following the loss at Stamford Bridge and death of Harald Hardrada at the hands of Harold Godwinson. The Battle of Hastings led to William the Conqueror seizing the English throne in, for the point, what year?
Answer: 1066

3493. 2007 riots in this city resulted from Muslim Imams calling for the death of writer Taslima Nasrin. Outside this city in the suburb of Barrackpore, the sepoy Mangal Pandey openly declared he would rebel against the British Raj due to the use of pig fat to grease cartridges. In this city, the Nawab of Bengal supposedly stuffed 140 prisoners of war in the tiny dungeon of Fort William. The Hooghly River runs through, for the point, what East Indian city with an infamous "Black Hole"?
Answer: Calcutta (or Kolkata)

3494. A legal code by this man was used by the Roman legal theorist Paulus to compose Lex Rhodia, which governed maritime laws in the eastern Mediterranean. This son of Sin-Muballit was supposedly given a codex by the god of Justice, Shamash [[shah-MAHSH]], while atop a mountain, possibly inspiring the story of Moses getting the Ten Commandments from God. "An Eye for an Eye" is a maxim found in, for the point, which Babylonian king's namesake "Code"?
Answer: Hammurabi (

3495. This man was able to transition from civil servitude to composition full-time after the wealthy patron Nadezhda [[nah-DESH-dah]] Von Meck sponsored him on the condition that they never meet in person. This composer wrote both the music and libretto to his opera, The Oprichnik. Inspired by his nation's victory at Borodino over Napoleon to write one composition, this composer implemented the sound of cannon fire at its climax. For the point, name this Russian composer of The 1812 Overture and Swan Lake.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky

3496. In order to protect this monarch and his family, Leopold II and Frederick William II threatened war in the Declaration of Pillnitz. The Marquis de Lafayette put down a riot against this monarch, resulting in the Champ de Mars [[SHAHMP duh MAHR]] Massacre. The National Convention convicted this king of high treason and executed him by guillotine in Revolution Square. The husband of Marie Antoinette was, for the point, which Bourbon king, deposed by the French Revolution?
Answer: Louis XVI [["the sixteenth"]] (

3497. In a work named for this field, ancient thinker Xenophon [[ZEN-uh-fun]] crafted a dialogue between Socrates and Ischomachus [[ISS-koh-MAHK-us]] in which they discuss farming techniques and how to manage a household. The first modern analysis in this field is considered Fernando Galiani's treatise Della Moneta. The mercantilism of Britain was criticized by Adam Smith in the The Wealth of Nations, a work in, for the point, what field concerning fiscal policy?
Answer: Economics (or Economists

3498. The duties of knighthood lead a mythical figure from this nation, Owain, to lose his love, "The Lady of the Fountain." The Celtic goddess of horses, Epona, is sometimes equated to this nation's mythic queen Rhiannon [[ree-AH-non]]. Bran the Blessed appears in a mythic cycle from this nation, attacking neighboring Ireland in an attempt to free his sister, Branwen. The Mabinogion [[MAH-bih- NOH-gee-un]] is a collection of myths from, for the point, which British substituent nation?
Answer: Wales (

3499. In an effort to win concessions in the last days of this war, Deng Hua [[DUNG-HWAH]] led the Jincheng campaign. The landings at Green, Blue, and Red Beaches led to combined UN forces securing the port of Incheon during this war. Following the loss of his capital early in this war, Syngman Rhee relocated the government to Busan [[boo-SAHN]]. The Demilitarized Zone was established following, for the point, what East Asian conflict of the 1950s?
Answer: Korean War (

3500. One book by this man, which is dedicated to Paul III, was published with a forward claiming it was only meant to make mathematical predictions. This author of On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres claimed that objects orbit in perfect circles. This man's namesake revolution led to the replacement of Ptolemy's geocentric model of the universe. For the point, name this Polish astronomer who promoted heliocentrism.
Answer: Nicolaus Copernicus (

3501. A Wali from this city named Husayn Pasha ibn Makki failed to prevent a Bedouin raid of hajj pilgrims. A type of high-quality steel named for this city had its method of production lost to modern smiths. The assassination of Uthman during the First Fitna and the rise of the Umayyads led to this city becoming the Caliphate's capital until the Abbasids moved it to Baghdad. For the point, name this modern capital of Syria.
Answer: Damascus (

3502. During the Cultural Revolution in China, musical works of this form were highly edited by Jiang Qing [[CHING] and her staff of composers. Kim Jong-il published a treatise written specifically about this musical style. Musicologists suggest that Mozart's three great works in this style are subtle commentaries on society, as were the works of Verdi and Wagner [[VAHG-nur]]. For the point, name this genre of theatrical music exemplified by The Marriage of Figaro and Nixon in China.
Answer: Opera

3503. This person is worshipped as a divine figure by the Yaohnanen [[yow-YAH-nen]] tribe, a cargo cult who venerate a photo depicting his 2007 visit to Vanuatu. This man, who was smuggled out of Greece as an infant in a fruit box, adopted his uncle's last name of Mountbatten due to anti- German sentiment in England. This man's funeral was held in April of 2021 in St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. For the point, name this man who held the title Duke of Edinburgh, the consort of Queen Elizabeth II.
Answer: Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (or Philip Mountbatten)

3504. An Upton Sinclair work titled solely for this commodity tells the story of the Ross family, who become wealthy due to finding this resource on the Watkins's Ranch. In the 1940s, the method of "Hydraulic Fracturing" was introduced to acquire this resource. A "spill" of this product by the BP Deepwater Horizon led to devastation in the Gulf of Mexico. The breakup of John D. Rockefeller's company in, for the point, what industry led to subsidiaries like Exxon and Chevron?
Answer: Oil (

3505. This city's Armenian Quarter was temporarily emptied following Justinian the Great's Monophysite [[muh-NAH-fih-site]] persecutions. While ruling a kingdom named for this city, Godfrey of Bouillon [[bwee-YOHN]] adopted the titles of princeps [[PRIN-seps]] and "Defender of the Holy Sepulchre" [[SEH-pul-ker]]. The success of the Maccabean revolt led to the cleansing of this city's Second Temple, inspiring the holiday of Hanukkah. The holiest city in Judaism is, for the point, what modern capital of Israel?
Answer: Jerusalem (

3506. After this man’s death, his literary rival, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, wrote an obituary and biographical profile of this man, depicting him as a drunken lunatic. In this man’s first publication, Tamerlane and Other Poems, he was credited as only “a Bostonian.” Before this author died under mysterious circumstances in Baltimore, he dreamt of producing his own journal, The Stylus. For the point, name this innovator in the detective genre who penned "The Raven."
Answer: Edgar Allan Poe

3507. Structures on this island were toppled over in the decades following the arrival of Jacob Roggeveen [ROH-ge-veen], the first European to visit this island. A yearly race to retrieve an egg from a rock next to this island was an important part of this island’s birdman cult. The still-undeciphered Rongorongo script was found on this island, which was annexed by Chile in 1888. For the point, name this island, home to sculpted heads called moai [[MOH-eye]].
Answer: Easter Island (or Rapa Nui)

3508. The appearance of one of these objects prompted the abdication of Emperor Ruizong [[RWEE-ZONG]], passing the throne to Xuanzong [[ZHWAN-ZONG]]. Suetonius [[sweh-TOH-nee-us]] records one of these events occurring a few months after the death of Julius Caesar, believed by Roman citizenry to be his departing soul. One of these objects named Hale-Bopp precipitated Napoleon's 1812 invasion of Russia. Mark Twain's birth year and death year coincided with the arrival of, for the point, what type of astronomical phenomenon named for Edmund Halley?
Answer: Comets (

3509. A downturn in this industry led to the Spitalfields [[SPIT-all-"fields"]] Riots in London's East End, where soldiers fired on weavers outside "The Dolphin" pub. Nylon was mass-produced in wartime Japan to replace a shortage of this product. The innovation of the Jacquard Loom led to resurgence of this cloth on the world market after it was overtaken by cotton. An ancient trade network traversing East Asia to Europe is named for, for the point, what luxury cloth?
Answer: Silk (

3510. It's not porcelain, but Parliament unintentionally increased the sale of this good following its ban on textile imports from China. Catherine de Braganza's arrival in England to marry Charles II likely made it fashionable to consume this drink daily rather than for medicinal purposes. The British East India Company's steady import of, for the point, what commodity led to its ubiquity in British culture?
Answer: Tea (

3511. Early in his reign, this king ordered the execution of his cousin, Amyntas IV. On his quest to reach the “ends of the world and the Great Outer Sea,” this man defeated the Indian King Porus at the Battle of the Hydaspes [[hy-DASS-pees]]. This member of the Argead Dynasty ascended to the throne after his sister’s wedding, at which his father was killed. For the point, name this king who created an empire stretching from Greece to northwestern India before his untimely death at age 32.
Answer: Alexander the Great (or Alexander III of Macedon

3512. In 1505 this man became a monk to honor a promise he made to Saint Anna after nearly being struck by lightning. This scholar discussed his daily habits in the book Table Talk and discouraged violence against feudal lords in his tract Against the Murderous, Thieving Hordes of Peasants. This theologian's stance against indulgences was laid out in a list of propositions he nailed to the door at All Saints' Church in Wittenberg [[VIT-en-berg]]. The author of the Ninety-Five Theses was, for the point, what seminal figure of the Reformation?
Answer: Martin Luther

3513. A former slave in this position was killed by being thrown down steps by his son-in-law and run over in a chariot by his daughter. Using the ruse of festival games, a holder of this position committed the abduction of the Sabine [[SAY-been]] women to populate his city. The Cult of Mars and the Vestal Virgins were established by the second holder of this position, Numa Pompilius. Tarquin [[TAR-kwin]] the Proud was the last person to hold, for the point, what regal position legendarily established by Romulus?
Answer: King of Rome (

3514. Operation Hectic was an SAS plot to assassinate this man and his aides by targeting their electoral headquarters with T-55 tank fire. This self-identified Marxist, who was replaced in a 2017 coup by Emmerson Mnangagwa [[mah-nahn-GAW-gwah]], signed the Lancaster House Agreement, toppling whites-only rule in Rhodesia. For the point, name this leader of the ZANU-Patriotic Front and long-time president of Zimbabwe.
Answer: Robert Mugabe [[moo-GAH-beh]] (or Robert Gabriel Mugabe)

3515. This man's forces fought the Ragamuffin War, a rebellion started by nomadic cowhands known as gauchos. This ruler deployed the Marquis of Erval to rebuff Paraguayan president Francisco Solano Lopez's invasion during the War of the Triple Alliance. This man's daughter, Isabel, passed the Golden Law, emancipating all the enslaved people in their nation in 1888. The final Emperor of Brazil was, for the point, which member of the House of Braganza, known as "The Magnanimous"?
Answer: Dom Pedro II (

3516. The founding of this empire coincided with the destruction of the Lodi [[LOW-die]] Dynasty following the First Battle of Panipat [[PAN-ee-pat]]. Along the Yamuna river, one of this empire's rulers ordered the construction of the asymmetrical Red Fort to commemorate the move of its capital from Agra to Delhi. This empire's rulers include the expansionist Aurangzeb [[ow-RAHNG-zeb]] and its founder, Babur the Tiger. Akbar the Great ruled, for the point, what Islamic empire of the Indian sub-continent?
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Hind-e Moǧulān

3517. Emperor Ferdinand I committed the "Blood Judgement" of this city to gain political control of it. Near Kahlenberg Mountain, Jan Sobieski [[YAHN soh-BYEH-skee]] led the Polish Hussars to break a 1683 Ottoman siege of this city. Following the Napoleonic Wars, Klemens von Metternich organized a "Congress" in this city, which aimed to end all continental wars by balancing the great powers of Europe. The Habsburgs ruled the Austrian Empire from, for the point, what city?
Answer: Vienna (or Wien)

3518. This political agreement was strengthened following Count Bernhard von Bülow [[BYOO- "low"]] threatening war over supremacy in Morocco. Foreign Secretary Lord Lansdowne ended Britain's era of "Splendid Isolation" by entering into this agreement in 1904. Support for Serbia pulled this alliance into a continental war following the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo [[SAH- rah-YAY-voh]]. The Central Powers fought World War One against, for the point, what political alliance of the UK, France, and Russia?
Answer: Triple Entente (

3519. This man was forced to resign as chamberlain for the king of Prussia after publishing "Diatribe of Doctor Akakia [[ah-kah-KYAH]]," criticizing Pierre Louis Maupertuis [[moh-pehr- TWEE]]. This thinker stated the Holy Roman Empire was "neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire." This man satirized Gottfried Leibnitz [[LIBE-nitz]] through his character of Pangloss in a novella subtitled Optimism. The character Candide [[kahn-DEED]] was created by, for the point, which French Enlightenment author?
Answer: Voltaire (

3520. One pseudo-scientific method that claims to be able to cure this condition includes high doses of vitamin C and "orthomolecular support," known as CEASE therapy. Leo Kanner first gave this term its modern usage and proposed the "refrigerator mother" theory, which has since been discarded. For the point, name this spectrum disorder characterized by difficulties in communication and social interaction.
Answer: Autism spectrum disorder (

3521. Al-Masudi, author of The Meadows of Gold, was known as "[this person] of the Arabic language." Boeotian [[bee-OH-shun]] native Plutarch called this man's writings "calumnious fictions." This man, who wrote in an Ionic dialect, finished an early historiography with the Battle of Mycale [[mih-KUH-lee]] in Book IX [[NINE]] of one work, dubbed "Calliope [[kah-LIE-oh-pee]]." The "Father of History" was, for the point, which Ancient Greek who detailed the Persian Wars?
Answer: Herodotus [[heh-RAH-doh-tuss]]

3522. This European man's namesake law code credits his ancestors, King Ina and King Offa, as being the first Brittonic men to be baptized. This man supposedly dressed as a bard to sneak into the city of Chippenham to gain intel prior to the Battle of Edington. This man, whose grandson Aethelstan united England, defeated the "Great Heathen Army" of the Viking leader Guthrum. For the point, name this "Great" king of Wessex and the Anglo-Saxons.
Answer: Alfred the Great

3523. After this artist designed an ashtray for Air India, they gifted him a baby elephant which was delivered to Cadaqués [[kah-dah-KESS]]. This monarchist was given the title "1st Marquess of Púbol [[POO-bohl]]" following a visit from King Juan Carlos I. This artist was expelled by the leftist André Breton [[breh-TOHN]] and his fellow surrealists for his ardent support of the Franco regime. The Persistence of Memory was painted by, for the point, what eccentric Catalonian artist?
Answer: Salvador Dalí (or Salvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dalí i Domènech)

3524. In 2012, nearly half the Honduran farmers of this good lost their yield due to a namesake "Rust." A religious form of this drink known as kishir was used by Sufi Dervishes to present to guests as they entered the home. Turks leaving leftover sacks of this good during the 1683 Siege of Vienna led to the construction of the first European house dedicated to this drink. The Ethiopian kingdom of Kaffa may have inspired the name of, for the point, what beans that are brewed into a caffeinated beverage?
Answer: Coffee (or Coffee beans

3525. In this war, the traitorous city of Capua [[KAP-yoo-uh]] was made ager publicus [[AH-ger POO-blih-kuss]], losing its civic rights. Quintus Fabius Maximus implemented his namesake delaying "Strategy" following this war's disastrous Battle of Cannae [[KAN-nee]], the bloodiest in the Republic's history. Losing this war's Battle of the Great Plains led Hannibal to abandon his Italian campaign to return to North Africa. Scipio [[SKIP-ee-oh]] Africanus's victory at Zama effectively ended, for the point, what Roman-Carthaginian War?
Answer: Second Punic War

3526. In this nation, a performance of the patriotic opera The Mute Girl of Portici [[por-TEE-chee]] led to riots outside the Royal Theatre of the Mint. This kingdom enlisted a gendarme [[zhahn- DAHRM]] known as the Force Publique [[poo-BLEEK]] to manage their Central African colonies. The Schlieffen [[SHLEE-fen]] Plan aimed to rapidly knock France out of the Great War by invading this smaller nation. Leopold II ruled, for the point, what European kingdom made up of Flanders and Wallonia?
Answer: Kingdom of Belgium (

3527. A remote lake in this range named the Roopkund is known for its high count of skeletons from far off lands like the Eastern Mediterranean Sea. Allied Pilots called the eastern end of this range "The Hump" due to its relative difficulty to cross while airlifting supplies to Republican China. Sherpa guide Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary summited this range's highest peak in the 1950s. For the point, name this range which forms the boundary of Tibet and Nepal, the home range of Mount Everest.
Answer: Himalayas (

3528. During this war, the Count of Cavour sent a 15,000 man Sardinian expeditionary force, which proved critical during its Siege of Sevastopol [[seh-VASS-toh-pohl]]. The Earl of Cardigan led the ill- fated "Charge of the Light Brigade" during this war's Battle of Balaclava [[bah-lah-KLAH-vah]]. Florence Nightingale gained prominence during this conflict. For the point, what war, fought primarily on a namesake peninsula, halted Russian imperial expansion into the Black Sea?
Answer: Crimean War (

3529. The first opera commissioned in this nation's language, titled Özsoy [[UHZ-soy]], is a retelling of a story from the Shahnemah. A ruler from what is today this nation named Selim III hosted operatic performances in the Topkapi Palace. In this modern nation, Pedrillo [[peh-DREE-yoh]] aims to rescue his lover Konstanze from the harem of Osmin in a Mozart work. Janissary music inspired Abduction from the Seraglio [[seh-RAH-lyoh]], a singspiel set in what is today, for the point, what Middle Eastern nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Turkiye Cumhuriyeti

3530. Herman Sörgel [[SUHR-gul]] devised the Panropa plan to increase usable land around this body by strategically building hydroelectric dams. Glass ingots and Pistacia [[pih-STAY-shuh]] resin were found in the Uluburun shipwreck in this sea off the coast of Bodrum. The development of the 50-rower penteconter vessel facilitated maritime trade across the eastern portion of this sea. For the point, name this European sea which was known as Mare Nostrum [[MAH-reh NOH-stroom]] to the Romans.
Answer: Mediterranean Sea (

3531. According to Francis Fukuyama's The End of History and the Last Man, this event represented the conclusion of the last challenge to liberal democracy as an ideology. Four months prior to this event, the Gang of Eight perpetrated the August Coup, though it was stopped by pro-Yeltsin forces. The reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev failed to prevent this political event. For the point, name this disintegration of a Communist nation into constituent countries like Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Russia.
Answer: Dissolution of the USSR (

3532. This foodstuff is the most commonly used ingredient in a Caelius Apicius [[KAY-lee-us ah- "PICK"-ee-us]] manual, De re culinaria [[deh-reh-koo-lih-NAH-ree-ah]]. In medieval Nuremburg, this food's quality was regulated by its office of Wurstlein [[VURST-"lean"]]. In Maccabees, Jewish citizens openly refusing to eat this un-kosher food led to Antiochus [[an-TIE-oh-kuss]] IV's army attempting to kill them. For the point, name this meat forbidden in Islam, a food derived from swine.
Answer: Pork (or Ham

3533. During this battle, a kamikaze squadron sank the carrier USS Bismarck Sea. Prior to this battle, Chester Nimitz claimed the Japanese would surrender the targeted island without a fight. Joe Rosenthal shot a partially-staged raising of the U.S. flag over Mount Suribachi [[soo-rih-BAH-chee]] during this battle. One of the last major battles of the Pacific Theatre was, for the point, what engagement on the namesake volcanic Japanese island?
Answer: Battle of Iwo Jima

3534. A scandal concerning this energy source was caused by the Virgil C. Summer expansion project in South Carolina, nearly bankrupting Westinghouse. Planning to exclusively use this energy source, Project Independence was a Nixon-era initiative to abandon the need for foreign oil by the year 1980. A radiation leak nearly led to a total meltdown at Three Mile Island, a plant utilizing, for the point, what energy source created through fission?
Answer: Nuclear Energy (

3535. Two inmates named Vrba and Wentzler name a report outlining the layout of this site, convincing Miklós [[MEE-klohsh]] Horthy to halt his deportation edict. The head of the Theresienstadt [[teh-RAY-zyen-SHTAHT]] orchestra, Pavel Haas, was sent to this place in 1944. A sign at this complex claimed "work sets you free," and this camp included the gas chambers at Birkenau. For the point, name this Nazi death camp in modern Poland, the deadliest of World War Two.
Answer: Auschwitz Concentration Camp (or Konzentrationslager Auschwitz

3536. In this nation, "The Scream of La Villa de Los Santos" began a major independence movement. The USS Nashville assisted this nation's soldiers stationed in Colon in repelling a Colombian invasion. During Operation Just Cause, the U.S. invaded this nation to depose de facto leader Manuel Noriega in 1989. For the point, name this Central American nation which contains a canal connecting the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Republic of Panama (or Republica de Panama)

3537. This woman employed the Munshi Abdul Karim as an Urdu teacher, and she described her grandson, William, as possessing "little heart and tact." This person was advised in her early rule by Lord Melbourne, before forming a longtime friendship with Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli. The Crystal Palace Exhibition was the brainchild of this ruler's husband, Albert. For ten points, name this long-reigning monarch, who presided over much of nineteenth-century Britain.
Answer: Queen Victoria (or Alexandrina Victoria)

3538. One theory about this event claimed Judah P. Benjamin perpetrated it by enlisting the help of the Rothschild banking family from Europe. Police officer John Frederick Parker's abandonment of his post to grab a drink made this event possible. Major Rathbone was stabbed with a dagger during this event, shortly before a man shouted "Sic Semper Tyrannus" during a performance of Our American Cousin. John Wilkes Booth perpetrated, for ten points, what killing of the sixteenth president?
Answer: The Abraham Lincoln Assassination in Ford's Theater (

3539. A character in this short story passes British spy Major Andre’s tree and loses his horse Gunpowder’s saddle after a party in Tarry Town. In this story, Katrina Van Tassel marries Brom Bones, who laughs when a crushed pumpkin is found near where a schoolteacher, Ichabod Crane, has vanished while being chased by a Galloping Hessian. For ten points, name this short story by Washington Irving in which the title location is haunted by the Headless Horseman.
Answer: "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"

3540. The Four Books and Five Classics are the authoritative texts of this man's philosophy, one of the so-called Hundred Schools of Thought. The first of this man's Five Constants is rén, or "humaneness." This man believed that the emperor's Mandate of Heaven must be subject to absolute moral principles, including virtues like filial piety. For ten points, name this ancient Chinese philosopher known for his interpretation of the Golden Rule.
Answer: Confucius (

3541. A loan from this nation's Erlanger & Co. allowed the Confederacy to build ironclads as blockade runners. Three emissaries from this nation requested bribes from U.S. diplomats before allowing negotiations with Talleyrand in the XYZ Affair. The U.S. fought the Quasi-War with this nation, who earlier sent armed forces to the Thirteen Colonies during the Yorktown campaign. The Louisiana colony was sold to the United States by, for ten points, what European country?
Answer: Kingdom of France (or Royaume de France

3542. The building of this structure was supervised by Ustad Ahmad Lahauri, who also laid the foundations of the Red Fort. This building, whose name is derived from Persian, was ordered by an emperor who was put under house arrest by his successor, Aurangzeb [[ow- RAHNG-zeb]]. This building was originally constructed to house the tomb of Mumtaz. For ten points, name this enormous mausoleum in Agra, India, constructed by Shah Jahan.
Answer: Taj Mahal (or Rauza-i Munawwara)

3543. While en route to Western Europe, this man had 4,000 denarii seized in the port of Trebizond, retaining some of his wealth by sewing precious stones into his coat. With Rustichello da Pisa, this man published his travelogue under the title Book of the Marvels of the World. That work describes this man's trip to the palace of Xanadu [[ZAN-ah-doo]] and his travels along the Silk Road. For ten points, name this Venetian merchant who explored the Far East and served Kublai Khan.
Answer: Marco Polo

3544. In modern Spain, this general created a makeshift bridge to cross the Baetis [[BAY- tiss]] River to win the Battle of Munda. Tribes like the Bibroci [[bee-BROH-kee]] and the Ancalites united around Cassibelanus [[cah-see-beh-LAH-nus]] in a failed attempt to repel this man's invasion of Britannia. This writer of De Bello Gallico defeated and captured the King Vercingetorix [[ver-sin-GEH-toh-riks]] during the Siege of Alesia. The Rubicon was crossed by, for ten points, what Roman dictator?
Answer: Gaius Julius Caesar (

3545. This journalist wrote for the newspaper Avanti!, but during World War One abandoned both it and his country's Socialist Party. This prime minister's followers, sometimes dubbed "Squadristis," were known as the Black Shirts. Declaring himself "Il Duce," [[eel-DOO-cheh]] this man aligned with Nazi Germany, though his armed forces failed to secure North Africa or stop the Allied invasion of Sicily. For ten points, name this leader of Italy during most of World War Two.
Answer: Benito Mussolini (or Benito Amilcare Andrea Mussolini) BONUS: Mussolini signed the Lateran Treaty to give independence to this tiny European city

3546. Practitioners of the Kumbhi Mela, a pilgrimage to this site, were attacked by the British during the seizure of Allahabad during the Sepoy Mutiny. The capital of the Nanda empire, Pataliputra [[pah-tah-lee-POO-trah]], was founded where this river meets the Son, and both the holy city of Varanasi and New Delhi lie on this river today. A namesake "Action Plan" by Rajiv Gandhi failed to clean-up, for ten points, which heavily polluted river in the eastern Indian sub-continent?
Answer: Ganges River (or the Ganga) BONUS: The Rajiv Gandhi administration also oversaw the recovery from the Bhopal disaster, a deadly event caused by a gas leak from this type of plant which produces chemicals meant to protect crops from harm. Pesticides (

3547. A group of Democratic representatives known as this scandal's "Babies" includes Vermont senator Patrick Leahy. During this scandal, Archibald Cox's refusal to drop a subpoena led to the "Saturday Night Massacre." This scandal involved wiretapping of the Democratic party's headquarters by the Committee to Re-elect the President. The resignation of Richard Nixon was motivated by, for ten points, what scandal revolving around a break-in at a namesake hotel?
Answer: Watergate Scandal BONUS: Which vice president of Richard Nixon later pardoned him during his own two-year presidential term, a deal often dubbed a "corrupt bargain"? Gerald Ford (or Gerald R(udolph) Ford, Jr.

3548. A major figure in this movement defined it in an essay titled "Answering the Question: What is [this movement]?" This movement's ideals were supposedly espoused by monarchs like Catherine the Great and were often spread through meetings at Masonic Lodges, coffeehouses, and salons. Preceded by Renaissance Humanism and the Scientific Revolution, for ten points, what intellectual movement of the 17th and 18th centuries was espoused by figures such as Immanuel Kant [[KAHNT]] and Voltaire?
Answer: Age of Enlightenment (

3549. The Hashemite monarch Faisal II ruled this nation until a 1958 officer coup executed him during the July Revolution. To counter Shia influence, this country invaded a neighbor led by Ayatollah Khomeini [[kho-MAY-nee]], resulting in a costly eight-year stalemate. This nation was the target of a 2003 U.S. invasion in an effort to depose its Ba'ath Party. The dictator Saddam Hussein led, for ten points, what Middle Eastern nation?
Answer: Republic of Iraq (or Jumhūriīyah al-ʿIrāq; or Komarî Êraq

3550. This man's son, Martin [[mahr-TEEN]], was exiled by Philip II of Spain after being in a plot to overthrow the Marqués de Falces [[FAHL-sess]]. Defying the governor of Cuba's return order, this man burned his own ships upon landing near modern-day Veracruz. Chroniclers report this man was mistaken for the god Quetzalcoatl [[KET-zahl-KWAH-til]], and he captured the city of Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohtch-teet-LAHN]] following the death of Moctezuma II. For ten points, name this conquistador who defeated the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Hernán Cortés BONUS: The ruins of Tenochtitlan lie beneath what North American capital city? Mexico City (

3551. The island of Gotland in this sea was the home of the Victual [[VIC-too-all]] Brothers, enemies of the Hanseatic [[HAN-see-at-ik]] League, a trading network of ports around this sea. The ports of Gdańsk [[guh-DANSK]] and Stockholm lie on this body of water, and the city of Saint Petersburg was created by Peter the Great to ensure Russian access to this sea. For ten points, name this large sea in northern Europe, named for an ancient tribe from what is now Lithuania and Latvia.
Answer: Baltic Sea(

3552. The whipping of the young chief of these people led to the cannibalization of a European ship's crew, an incident known as the Boyd Massacre. Clans of these people are known as hapū, and after gaining firearms from Europeans, these people fought the Musket Wars. The poorly-translated Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] led to this people group signing away their land to British authorities. The indigenous people of New Zealand are, for ten points, what Polynesian culture?
Answer: Māori BONUS: This British captain and navigator was the first European to successfully communicate with the Māori and names the strait separating North and South island. James Cook (

3553. Democratic president whose policies led to the highest number of U.S. ground troops.
Answer: Lyndon Baines Johnson (or LBJ)

3554. Republican president who gradually pulled out of the war through his policy of Vietnamization.
Answer: Richard M(ilhous) Nixon

3555. Neighboring Southeast Asian nation which, along with Laos, was secretly bombed.
Answer: Kingdom of Cambodia (or Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea)

3556. South Vietnamese capital whose 1975 fall signaled the end of the war.
Answer: Saigon (or Ho Chi Minh City)

3557. 1968 "Offensive" named for a holiday, which included the Hue [[WAY]] Massacre and the Battle of Khe Sanh [[KAY SAHN]].
Answer: Tet Offensive (or Sự kiện Tết Mậu Thân)

3558. North Vietnamese-supported guerillas who fought against U.S. forces.
Answer: Viet Cong (or

3559. Holy wars first called by Urban II which aimed to Christianize foreign lands.
Answer: Crusades (

3560. "Great" Pope who names both a "Calendar" and a "Chant."
Answer: Pope Gregory I (or Gregory the Great

3561. Papal-appointed officers who rooted out heresy across Western Europe.
Answer: Inquisitors (

3562. "Permit" bought by the faithful, purported to absolve them of sins.
Answer: Indulgences

3563. Most common order of monks in medieval Western Europe, known for their black clothes and their mantra, "Work and Pray."
Answer: Benedictine monks (or Benedictines

3564. Saint and namesake of the Slavic alphabet who proselytized the Slavs with his brother, Methodius.
Answer: Saint Cyril (

3565. Andean crop, a famine of which killed over one million Irish people in the 19th century.
Answer: Potatoes (

3566. Bird once found exclusively in the New World supposedly eaten at the first Thanksgiving.
Answer: Turkey

3567. American plant often ceremonially smoked by natives, which was first successfully planted in Europe in a region called "Los Cigarrales."
Answer: Tobacco

3568. Animal introduced from Europe that was adopted by Plains Indians to assist in herding bison.
Answer: Horses

3569. New World bean, the basis of chocolate, that was once used as a currency throughout Mesopotamia.
Answer: Cacao (

3570. Nightshade fruit which was believed to be poisonous until a gardener proved to Philip II that it was good for sauces.
Answer: Tomatoes

3571. Like the Ancient Egyptians, this civilization depicted women as white-skinned and men as red. This civilization's deities were primarily female, such as a snake goddess, and its people honored them through the display of double-headed axes and the sport of (+) bull leaping. Arthur Evans was the first to distinguish this civilization from the later Myceneans [[MY-seh-NEE-ens]], although he was unable to (*) decipher its "linear" script. For ten points, name this proto-Greek civilization of Crete.
Answer: Minoans (

3572. This company briefly purchased Columbia Pictures but sold it to Sony following the failure of Ishtar. Near its headquarters, this company operates a multi-storied tourist attraction called the "World of" (+) [this company]. Founded by Asa Griggs Candler to sell a namesake drink invented in 1886 by John Pemberton, (*) for ten points, name this multinational beverage corporation based in Atlanta, Georgia, the chief rival of Pepsi.
Answer: The Coca-Cola Company (

3573. In the aftermath of this event, the victor fled to St. Simon's Island in Georgia to hide at Pierce Butler's plantation. The victim of this event supposedly told Dr. David Hosack he intended to (+) shoot into the ground, and this event occurred in part because one participant opposed the other's 1800 U.S. presidential run. Weehawken, (*) New Jersey was the sight of, for ten points, what violent confrontation between the former Secretary of the Treasury and the sitting vice president?
Answer: Burr-Hamilton Duel (

3574. These specific people were banned from working on the Sabbath in the "Manifesto of three-day Corvee [[kor-VEH]]" passed by Paul I. During the "Forbidden Years," the hardship of the (+) Livonian wars and crop failure led to these specific people losing their right to move from their estate. These people paid a rent known as obrok to the landed (*) boyars they served. In 1861, Alexander II emancipated, for ten points, what peasant class of Russia?
Answer: Russian Serfs (

3575. In this nation, Hezekiah Ochuka was hanged for his leadership of a 1982 coup attempt, which failed after most of his soldiers got drunk instead of arresting the sitting president. The White Highlands of this nation were seized during the (+) Mau Mau Uprising, whose participants included Daniel arap Moi and Jomo (*) Kenyatta. Formerly known as British East Africa, for ten points, what nation includes cities such as Mombasa and Nairobi?
Answer: Republic of Kenya (or Jamhuri ya Kenya)

3576. Known as heket to the Egyptians, this good fills the "mouth of a perfectly contented man," according to a 23rd century BC proverb. Shorting a customer of this substance is punishable by (+) drowning per the Code of Hammurabi, and the Sumerians drank a thick version of this beverage through a straw. Cereals like barley and (*) wheat are used to make, for ten points, what ancient alcoholic drink often made at a brewery?
Answer: Beer

3577. One composer from this modern-day country used a "sacred minimalist" sound that is exemplified by his Symphony of Sorrowful Songs and the (+) Copernican Symphony. Another composer from this country wrote a series of pieces based on music from this country, including mazurkas and polonaises, though he is best known for his études and the Minute Waltz. (*) For ten points, name this home country of Henryk Górecki and Frédéric Chopin [[shoh-PAHN]], who was born in the Duchy of Warsaw.
Answer: Republic of Poland (or Rzeczpospolita Polska

3578. Verrocchio [[veh-ROH-kyoh]] depicted this figure in bronze following his most famous action, while Bernini sculpted a marble statue of this man during that same violent (+) action. Donatello's sculpture of this figure was the first freestanding nude since antiquity, and another depiction of this hero has an oversized (*) head to appear proportional from below. For ten points, name this Biblical king who was depicted in a marble sculpture by Michelangelo before he slays Goliath.
Answer: David (or Davit

3579. This man's middle name meant "troublemaker" in the Xhosa [[KOH-sah]] language. As a member of his country's Communist Party, this man lived on the Liliesleaf Farm while heading "Spear of the Nation." (+) In 1964, this man declared "I Am Prepared to Die" during the Rivonia Trial. During his country's first free elections in 1994, this man's African (*) National Congress defeated F.W. de Klerk's National Party. For ten points, name this first post-apartheid South African president.
Answer: Nelson Mandela (or Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela

3580. The northern half of this peninsula was controlled in the 600s by an Exarchate [[EKS- ar-kate]] based in Ravenna. Hannibal Barca crossed the Alps with a mercenary army to raid this peninsula which hosts ancient cities like Mediolanum. The Umbrians and Samnites fought a nascent republic on this peninsula. For ten points, name this peninsula, the former home of the Etruscan civilization and the heart of the Roman Empire.
Answer: Italian Peninsula (

3581. This leader obtained a doctorate in quantum chemistry in 1986 prior to entering politics. This politician played a central role in negotiating the Treaty of Lisbon and was a main figure behind the stimulus plan to help shelter the European Union from the Great Recession. The leader of the Christian Democratic Union from 2000 to 2018, this politician was elected to her highest position in 2005. For ten points, name this first female chancellor of Germany.
Answer: Angela Merkel (or Angela Dorothea Merkel

3582. Friedrich Miescher [[MEE-shuh]] first identified this molecule in 1869, calling it nuclein. Helicases create a "fork" during the replication of this molecule, whose structure was identified thanks to Rosalind Franklin's Photo 51. For ten points, name this molecule that is often sequenced, best identified by its double-helix structure documented by Watson and Crick.
Answer: DNA (

3583. This man ordered the Hungnam Evacuation following his failure to predict an invasion by the People's Volunteer Army. This man's failure to abandon the strategically insignificant site of Peleliu [[peh-LEH-loo]] resulted in devastating losses for U.S. marines. This man's support of the use of nuclear weapons in the Korean War led to his sacking by Harry S. Truman. For ten points, name this Supreme Allied commander in the Pacific Theater.
Answer: Douglas MacArthur

3584. This ruler called Foreign Minister Nikita Panin a "personal encyclopedia," though Panin fell out of favor by advocating for the Northern Alliance with Prussia. To convince this empress that the typical serf fares well, her lover and advisor Grigory Potemkin supposedly showed her retinue false villages in Crimea. Upon conversion to the Russian Orthodox church, the name Yekaterina was given to, for ten points, which Russian empress of the 18th century?
Answer: Catherine the Great (

3585. The "Plan of the Three Guarantees" in this nation's city of Iguala established a short- lived Constitutional Monarchy there. The ransacking of a foreign chef's shop led to the First French Intervention in this nation during the Pastry War. This nation's war of independence began after the Grito de Dolores by Don Miguel Hidalgo. Much of New Spain was made up of, for ten points, what North American nation to the south of the United States?
Answer: United

3586. This artist may depict Harman van Swole in a Portrait of a Slav Prince later bought by Catherine the Great. This artist was hired by the Guild of Surgeons in his home nation to paint the dissection of the deceased criminal Aris Kindt. Another work by this man depicts a shooting company led by Franz Banning Cocq [["COKE"]] in The Night Watch. For ten points, name this prolific Dutch artist whose other work includes many self-portraits and The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp.
Answer: Rembrandt van Rijn (or Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn

3587. Ibn Battuta claimed that this structure's purpose was to keep out demonic beasts named Gog and Magog. The first sections of this structure were believed to have been built during the Spring and Autumn Period. The rebel Li Zicheng was defeated by a combined force of Manchus and General Wu Sangui's [[SAHNG-GWEES]] loyalists at this structure's namesake fortress in the Battle of Shanhai Pass. For ten points, name this series of fortifications across northern China.
Answer: Great Wall of China (

3588. The Cripps mission was a failed attempt to secure this colony's full cooperation in its colonizer's World War Two efforts. This colony's Lucknow Pact united its rival Muslim League and a namesake National Congress. The last viceroy of this colony was Lord Mountbatten, who withheld support for the creation of an independent Pakistan. Gaining its independence as the culmination of the 3 June Plan was, for ten points, what subcontinental British colony?
Answer: India (

3589. This ruler met up with Maximilian I to defeat the French at the Battle of the Spurs, though he later took part in a peaceful celebration with Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. After supporting the Acts of Supremacy, this monarch presided over the dissolution of his country's monasteries. That occurred after this man broke from the Catholic Church in order to divorce Catherine of Aragon. For ten points, name this Tudor king of England, remembered for his six wives.
Answer: Henry VIII [[the eighth]] BONUS: This woman became Henry's second wife after he secured his divorce from Catherine. This woman was the mother of future Queen Elizabeth I. Anne Boleyn

3590. The extinct great auk lived around the northern part of this ocean, and the Grand Banks in this ocean were a major center for cod fishing until their depletion in the 1990s. The navigator Himilco might have discovered this sea's Sargasso region in the 5th century BC. Most likely named for a certain globe-carrying Titan, for ten points, what is this ocean on which one finds the cities of Boston and New York?
Answer: Atlantic Ocean BONUS: The Grand Banks lie off the coast of this island which was possibly known as "Vinland" to Leif Ericson. It is the site of the Viking village L'Anse aux Meadows [[lahn-soh- meh-DOH]]. Newfoundland (do not

3591. The Ratha was a variant of this military technology introduced during India's Harappan [[hah-RAH-pun]] period. In an effort to counter heavy hoplite [[HOP-lite]] infantry, Xerxes I [[ZERK-seez "the first"]] deployed the "scythed" variety of this technology. The Battle of Kadesh was the largest battle deploying this military technology. For ten points, name this swift, often multi-horsed conveyance used in Bronze Age warfare.
Answer: War Chariots (

3592. This island's Sette Giugno [[seh-TAY JYOON-yoh]] holiday commemorates a British massacre of Italian irredentists. It's not Rhodes, but King George VI [[the sixth]] awarded this entire island the George Cross after it resisted Axis bombing campaigns. The image of Ottoman invincibility was shattered after the Knights Hospitaller successfully defended this island in 1565. Jean Parisot de Valette [[pah-ree-SOH duh-vah-LET]] names the capital of, for ten points, what small island nation to the south of Sicily?
Answer: Republic of Malta (or Repubblika ta' Malta

3593. This man's work as a secretary has led to debate over how much of his personal philosophy went into the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, which espoused aristocracy and slavery. One work by this thinker outlines the "State of Nature" and claims that society was built to protect property, which he defined as "life, liberty, and estate," inspiring Thomas Jefferson. For ten points, name this English empiricist and "Father of Liberalism" who wrote Two Treatises of Government.
Answer: John Locke BONUS: Much of Locke's philosophy is built on this concept, established in a namesake book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. This theory asserts that the public has directly or indirectly consented to give up their personal freedom to an authority in exchange for protection and order. Social Contract Theory (or The Social Contract)

3594. A craze concerning this technology struck England in 1896 as people believed it had both beautification and germicidal properties. Until the 1950s, this technology was sold commercially to U.S. shoe stores to help associates size customers. Discoverer Wilhelm Roentgen [[VIL-helm RENT-gehn]] shouted “I have seen my death!” due to this invention revealing his hand's metacarpals and phalanges. For ten points, name this form of electromagnetic radiation often used to see if human bones are broken.
Answer: X-Ray (

3595. Following this event, Enver Hoxha [[HODJ-uh]] pulled Albania out of the Warsaw Pact. In protest of the end of this event, student Jan Palach [[YAHN pah-LAHK]] set himself on fire in Wenceslas [[WEN-seh-slahss]] Square. Military intervention during this event was justified by the Brezhnev Doctrine. The reforms of Alexander Dubček [[DOOB-chek]] led to, for ten points, what 1968 period of liberalization that was crushed by Soviet intervention in the namesake Czech city?
Answer: Prague Spring (

3596. Mansa who devalued the price of gold in Cairo due to his generosity.
Answer: Mansa Musa I

3597. Good produced by Mali used to preserve meat, worth its weight in gold.
Answer: Salt (or NaCl; or Sodium Chloride)

3598. Legendarily wealthy metropolis on the Niger [[nee-ZHER]] River annexed into the empire in 1324.
Answer: Timbuktu (or Tin Buqt)

3599. Rival West African empire which eclipsed Mali in importance in the 16th century.
Answer: Songhai

3600. West African university which was purported to have a larger collection than the Library of Alexandria.
Answer: Sankore University (or Sankoré Madrasah)

3601. Mandinka king who established the Mali Empire.
Answer: Sundiata [[soon-JAH-tah]] Keita (

3602. Czech city in which a "Defenestration" of Catholic officials began the Bohemian phase of the war.
Answer: Prague (or Prag)

3603. Dynasty of Holy Roman Emperors from Austria who fought to reinstitute Catholicism as the majority faith in the realm.
Answer: Habsburgs

3604. Region of Spain, including Barcelona, which revolted during a sub-conflict within the war.
Answer: Catalonia (

3605. German region which names a series of peace treaties ending the war.
Answer: Westphalia (or North Rhine-Westphalia

3606. Swedish "Lion of the North" who intervened to win a major victory at Breitenfeld [["BRIGHT"-en-feld]].
Answer: Gustavus Adolphus (or Gustav II)

3607. 16th century treaty which allowed Imperial princes to choose what Christian faith to follow.
Answer: Peace of Augsburg (

3608. Religious prophet of whom the Abbasids considered themselves the successor.
Answer: Muhammad ibn Abdullah (

3609. Color of the Abbasid flag, meant to contrast with the white banner of their predecessors.
Answer: Black (

3610. City in modern Iraq built to be their capital.
Answer: Baghdad

3611. Title claimed by their ruler which translates to "successor" in Arabic.
Answer: Caliph

3612. Enslaved soldiers who later founded a sultanate in Egypt that was conquered by the Ottomans.
Answer: Mamlukes

3613. Islamic dynasty they defeated and usurped in 750 CE.
Answer: Umayyad (or Umayyads)

3614. This politician signed the Mulford Act, against which the Black Panthers protested by marching on his capitol bearing arms. This man called in the National Guard to quell the People's Park Protest in the city of (+) Berkeley. After impressing his fellow Republicans with a speech in support of Barry Goldwater, this man defeated Pat Brown to become the governor of California. (*) For ten points, name this man who gave the "Time for Choosing" speech and was later elected president of the United States in 1980 and 1984.
Answer: Ronald Reagan (or Ronald Wilson Reagan)

3615. The Shapley-Curtis debate centered on whether or not this structure was a "spiral nebula." The center of this structure contains a radio source discovered in 1931 by Karl Jansky, the supermassive black hole Sagittarius (+) A-star, and this structure was believed by the Babylonians to be the severed tail of a dragoness. Orbited by Large and Small Clouds named for (*) Ferdinand Magellan, for ten points, what is this galaxy which is home to the Sun and Earth?
Answer: Milky Way galaxy

3616. This city was founded in 1565 by Pedro Menéndez de Avilés [[ah-vee-LEHS]] on the feast day of the patron of brewers. This city was intended to be turned into a winter resort by an industrialist who constructed the Hotel Alcazar and Hotel Ponce de Leon. (+) Leased convict labor was used in this city to construct a railroad funded by Henry Flagler, who is buried in this city. (*) For ten points, name this Florida city, the oldest continuously-inhabited European settlement in the United States.
Answer: St. Augustine (or San Agustín)

3617. With his lover, this crown prince planned to flee to England and potentially usurp the throne from his father during the Katte [[KAH-tuh]] Affair. The failure of the Austrians and Russians to follow-up on the Battle of (+) Kunersdorf was known as this king's "Miracle of the House of Brandenburg." This German's victory in the Seven Years' War led to his country's annexation of (*) Silesia. For ten points, name this "Great" king of Prussia during the mid-18th century.
Answer: Frederick the Great (or Friedrich der Große [["GROSS"-uh]]

3618. The Bandeirantes [[bahn-deh-RAHN-tehs]] were adventurers in this modern nation who dressed like Jesuits to dupe natives into enslavement. Those raiders often spoke Língua Geral [[LEEN-gwah heh-RAHL], a (+) pidgin which mixed this country's European language with Tupi. This South American nation allied with Argentina and Uruguay in a "Triple Alliance'' to halt Paraguayan aggression. Pedro (*) Cabral discovered, for ten points, what large former Portuguese colony?
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil (or República Federativa do Brasil

3619. The mercenary group known as "The Black Band" fielded a contingent of men who wielded a zweihander [[ZVAI-hahn-duh]], a type of this weapon. Toyotomi Hideyoshi conducted "hunts" named (+) for these weapons, which seized them from the peasantry to create a government monopoly on them. The katana and rapier are (*) types of, for ten points, what sharp weapons often used for stabbing or cutting?
Answer: Swords (

3620. Scholars believe this mythic figure was syncretized with the Italic shepherd Garanus upon arrival to the Italian peninsula. Alongside Pompeii, a city bearing the name of this figure was partially preserved under the ash from the eruption of Mount (+) Vesuvius. Brandishing a lion skin pelt, the Roman emperor Commodus [[KAH-moh- dus]] often dressed as this mythic figure during his gladiatorial fights. (*) For ten points, name this Roman demi-god and son of Jupiter, known for his immense strength.
Answer: Hercules (

3621. This country was listed as "for sale" on eBay in 2006, and bids reached nearly 3,000 dollars before it was shut down. The 12-feet tall Giant Moa was hunted into extinction by Eastern Polynesian (+) settlers who arrived in what is now this nation in the 13th or 14th century. The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings were primarily filmed in this country's (*) North and South Islands. The British established the colonial capital of Auckland in, for ten points, which nation in Oceania?
Answer: New Zealand (

3622. In the aftermath of this event, a building at Ignalina, Lithuania was closed by international agreement. The "Red Forest" was created by this event, after which a bubbler pool was (+) drained thanks to the efforts of three engineers who were awarded the Order of Courage by Petro Poroshenko. Wildlife has run rampant in a 30- kilometer area called the Zone of Alienation (*) that was created after this event. For ten points, name this nuclear disaster that occurred outside Pripyat [[PREE-pyat]], Ukraine.
Answer: Chernobyl disaster (

3623. This U.S. immigrant's early ventures included investments in Adams Express and the founding of the Keystone Bridge Company. After selling his largest company to J.P. Morgan, this author of the "Gospel of Wealth" created a namesake foundation to establish libraries and research councils. Making most of his wealth as a steel magnate, for ten points, what Scottish-born American philanthropist built an eponymous concert hall in New York City?
Answer: Andrew Carnegie

3624. Cave paintings in the Acacus [[ah-KAH-kus]] Mountains indicate this desert may only have formed after the last Ice Age. The Tibesti mountains lie in this desert, which in recent decades has advanced south into the Sahel [[sah-HEEL]]. Peoples including the Berbers and the Tuareg [[TWAH-reg]] led gold and salt caravans across this desert. Historically crossed by Bedouin caravans, for ten points, what is this massive desert in northern Africa?
Answer: Sahara Desert (or aṣ-ṣaḥrāʼ al-kubrá)

3625. This structure's "Robber's Tunnel" was likely resealed during the Ramesside Restoration, one of many ancient sites refurbished by the sitting government. At the foot of this structure is a preserved solar barque [[BARK]] known as Khufu's Ship. First built in the 26th Century BC, this building stood as the tallest structure in the world until the construction of the Lincoln Cathedral in 1311. For ten points, name this Egyptian tomb and "Ancient Wonder of the World."
Answer: Great Pyramid of Giza (

3626. During Operation Iskra, Kirill Meretskov [[meh-RET-skof]] conducted an effort to open this city to a supply route known as the "Road of Life." In conjunction with Finland, Nazi Germany's Army Group North besieged this city for two and half years during World War Two. The outbreak of World War One led to this city being renamed Petrograd. The Hermitage and Winter Palace are in, for ten points, what one-time capital of Imperial Russia?
Answer: St. Petersburg (or Leningrad

3627. During this conflict, the The Sun's headline "Gotcha" caused controversy for downplaying its casualties. Operation Rosario, ordered by Leopoldo Galtieri [[gahl-TYEH- ree]], began this war, which included an engagement between the General Belgrano and the HMS Conqueror. Margaret Thatcher and her War Cabinet quickly recaptured South Georgia during this conflict. The UK and Argentina vied for control of a namesake Atlantic archipelago in, for ten points, what ten-week war in 1982?
Answer: Falklands War (

3628. Callimachus [[kah-lee-MAH-kuss]] died at this battle while chasing the losing side to their ships. One side in this battle failed to get reinforcements due to the Carneia [[kar-NAY- uh]] festival. The winning strategy in this battle was created by Miltiades [[mil-TYE-ah-deez]], who defeated the forces of Darius I. A messenger supposedly ran over twenty miles to report this battle's outcome. For ten points, name this battle of the Greco-Persian Wars that inspired a lengthy footrace.
Answer: Battle of Marathon (or Machē tou Marathōnos)

3629. This country purged its military in the 2000s on the basis of the “Ergenekon” [[ar- geh-NEH-kon]] ultra-nationalist conspiracy. In 2019, this country launched Operation Peace Spring after the U.S. pulled its support from Kurdish allies. This country has been accused of democratic backsliding and Islamism under the AKP, or Justice and Development Party, hurting their chances of joining the EU. For ten points, name this country led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[reh-CHEP ty-EEP EHR-duh-wahn]].
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti)

3630. A pro-cleric branch of this ideology known as Integralism attempted to overthrow Getulio [[zheh-TOO-lyoh]] Vargas during the Guanabara attack in Brazil. MP Oswald Mosely led a British Union of this ideology, which plummeted in popularity following the Night of the Long Knives. The Falangist [[fah-LAHN-jist]] party of Spain followed this ideology. "National Socialism" in Germany was a subset of, for ten points, what nebulously-defined radical far- right ideology, popular in the Interwar years?
Answer: Fascism (

3631. In this city, millwright Rufus Putnam created effective prefabricated fortifications prior to the battle of Dorchester Heights. Henry Knox dragged cannons captured at Fort Ticonderoga to assist in Washington's capture of this city. William Prescott and Israel Putnam led a failed defense of Breed's Hill during Thomas Gage's 1775 assault on this city. A 1770 "Massacre" occurred in, for ten points, what New England city, the site of the Battle of Bunker Hill?
Answer: Boston BONUS: Which future U.S president successfully earned the acquittal of the perpetrators of the Boston Massacre as a lawyer in their

3632. Using an aquarium, filmmaker Georges Méliès [[mel-YAY]] simulated exploring this ship's wreckage in a 19th century silent short film. The 1898 Del Peral [[peh-RAHL]] Inquiry found that this ship's demise was not caused by hitting a mine. In an example of "yellow journalism," this ship's name was rhymed with the phrase "To Hell with Spain" by the U.S. press. For ten points, name this cruiser whose sinking in Havana Harbor was an impetus for the Spanish-American War.
Answer: USS Maine BONUS: This newspaper magnate and inspiration for the film Citizen Kane used the Maine tragedy as a way to bolster sales during the Circulation Wars with Joseph Pulitzer. William Randolph Hearst

3633. This man made a 300-mile long journey to Delagoa Bay following his escape from a Boer prison camp. The disaster of the Dardanelles campaign, especially the Battle of Gallipoli [[gah-LIH-poh-lee]], led to this man's resignation as First Lord of the Admiralty. Following the Dunkirk evacuation, this PM gave the "This was their finest hour" speech to the House of Commons. For ten points, name this prime minister of the UK during the majority of World War Two.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill) BONUS: Churchill served as War Secretary to this prime minister of Welsh descent who made up the Big Three at Versailles with Georges Clemenceau [[kleh-mahn-SOH]] and Woodrow Wilson. David Lloyd George (

3634. During this dynasty, the oldest still-extant wooden building in the world, the Buddhist Nanchan Temple, was built. This dynasty failed to assert control over the Fergana Valley following a military defeat by the Abbasids at the Talas River. The An Lushan Rebellion hastened the fall of this dynasty, and Empress Wu briefly interrupted it in the late 7th century. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty which succeeded the Sui [[SWEE]] and was followed by the Song.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (

3635. Cicero [[SIH-seh-roh]] called this city's general Epaminondas [[eh-pah-mih-NAHN- duss]], who fell at the Battle of Mantinea [[mahn-tih-NEH-ah]], the "First Man of Greece." Until their defeat at Chaeronea [[kay-roh-NAY-uh]], a unit of 300 male lovers called the Sacred Band defended this city. This city-state, which was legendarily founded by Cadmus, was fought over by the two sons of Oedipus in Seven Against [this city]. For ten points, name this Boeotian [[boe-EE-shuhn]] city-state which shares its name with an ancient Egyptian capital.
Answer: Thebes (

3636. This politician had three electoral votes cast for him in the 2016 election from the state of Washington. This man became National Security Adviser for Reagan in the wake of the Iran-Contra Scandal. Following the January 2021 Capitol attacks, this politician publicly left the Republican Party. This man died from COVID-19 complications at Walter Reed hospital in October of 2021. The secretary of state during the first George W. Bush administration was, for ten points, which four-star general?
Answer: Colin Powell (or Colin Luther Powell) BONUS: What "massacre" of Vietnamese citizens by U.S. troops under William Calley was allegedly "whitewashed" by a then 31-year old Colin Powell? My Lai [[MEE "LIE"]] Massacre

3637. Theia [[THAY-uh]] was one of these beings, who with her consort, Hyperion, birthed Eos [[AY-ohs]], Selene, and Helios. One of these beings, Iapetus [["eye"-AP-ih-tus]], fathered the figures who respectively gave humans fire and who held up the world, Prometheus and Atlas. The most powerful of these beings was the husband of Rhea [[RAY-uh]] and castrated his father, Uranus, before being defeated and cast into Tartarus. For ten points, name these pre-Olympian gods who were overthrown by Zeus and his siblings.
Answer: Titans (

3638. In this nation, Inaka [[ee-NAH-kah]] is a term for people who live in small hamlets far from major metropolitan areas. An eighth-century Shugendo monk was the first to summit one of this nation's "Three Holy Mountains," Mount Haku. Every twenty years, this nation's pilgrimage site, the Ise [[EE-seh]] Grand Shrine, is rebuilt to represent death and renewal in the Shinto faith. The cities of Osaka and Nagasaki are found in, for ten points, what East Asian nation?
Answer: Japan (

3639. Leader of the Nationalist forces that won the war.
Answer: Francisco Franco (or Francisco Franco Bahamonde)

3640. Spanish capital whose fall marked the end of the war.
Answer: Madrid

3641. Basque city whose bombing inspired a Picasso artwork of the incident.
Answer: Guernica

3642. "Brigade" named for an U.S. president which supported the Republicans during the war.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln Brigade (

3643. "Legion" sent by Hitler to provide air support to the Falangists [[fah-LAHN-jists]], resulting in bombings throughout Spain.
Answer: Condor Legion (or Legion Condor

3644. U.S. author who based his novel For Whom the Bell Tolls on his experiences in the war.
Answer: Ernest Hemingway (or Ernest Miller Hemingway)

3645. Founder of the Soviet Union who led the Bolsheviks during the revolution.
Answer: Vladimir Ilych Lenin (or Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov)

3646. Deposed Tsar killed in Yekaterinburg by Bolshevik soldiers.
Answer: Nicholas II Romanov

3647. War Soviet Russia pulled out of after the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
Answer: World War One (or WW One

3648. Palatial complex in St. Petersburg occupied by the Bolsheviks, causing the fall of the Provisional Government.
Answer: Winter Palace (or Zimnij dvorets)

3649. Primary Bolshevik military used to fight the anti-communists and establish Soviet Socialist Republics.
Answer: Red Army (or Krasnaya Armiya

3650. Colorfully-named force supported by the Western Powers which fought the Bolsheviks during the Russian Civil War.
Answer: Whites (

3651. Only nation to gain independence via a slave revolt, led by Toussaint L'Overture [[too-SAHNT loh-vehr-TYOOR]] and Jean-Jacques Dessalines [[deh-sah-LEEN]].
Answer: Republic of Haiti (

3652. Abolitionist who aimed to start a slave revolt through his raid on Harpers Ferry.
Answer: John Brown

3653. 1831 insurrection in Southampton County, Virginia led by a namesake enslaved preacher.
Answer: Nat Turner's Rebellion (

3654. Florida tribe formed from a combination of runaway slaves and remnants of the Muskogee [[mus-KOH-gee]] people.
Answer: Seminoles

3655. Spanish schooner taken over by West African slaves, resulting in a namesake Supreme Court case.
Answer: The Amistad (or La Amistad

3656. Revolt led by a man named Cato in South Carolina which aimed to move its participants to Spanish Florida.
Answer: Stono Rebellion

3657. Ne Win of Myanmar may have been trained by the last of these people. Ten of these people formed a group of "Braves," and some used a tool named for "water spiders." In one incident, these people replicated Mon lamps in (+) an attack. Nightingale floors were intended to expose these people, whose training likely originated with the Iga clan in the Kansai region. Often shown with star-shaped (*) shuriken, for ten points, who were these stealthy Japanese mercenaries?
Answer: Ninja (

3658. A ruler of this empire produced the Kandahar [[KAN-dah-har]] Inscription, written in Aramaic and Greek, to encourage foreigners to adopt "Dharma." Seleucus I Nicator [[seh-LOO-kas "the first" neh-KAY-tor]] sent the diplomat (+) Megasthenes [[meh-GAS-theh-nees]] to this empire's court, resulting in the ethnography Indika. Much of the Deccan Plateau region was conquered and held by this empire's ruler Bindusara. The Buddhist convert (*) Ashoka ruled, for ten points, what ancient Indian empire founded by Chandragupta [[chahn-drah-GOOP-tah]]?
Answer: Mauryan Empire (or the Mauryans

3659. In this nation, the nau cargo ship known as Nossa Senhora sank in its longest river while carrying peppercorns back from India. In the 15th century, Afonso III from the House of Aviz styled himself ruler of this one-time (+) kingdom and the recently conquered region of Algarve [[al-GAR-veh]]. The expedition to Ceuta [[seh-YOO-tah]] was launched from this nation's city of Porto by Henry the Navigator. (*) For ten points, identify this European country on the Iberian Peninsula, governed from Lisbon.
Answer: Portugal (

3660. A group of Democrats with this name nominated former Republican John M. Palmer as their presidential candidate in 1896. An 1869 "Panic" over this good occurred after investors Jay Gould and James (+) Fisk attempted to corner its market. At the 1896 DNC, bimetallism supporter William Jennings Bryan delivered a speech stating "you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of" (*) [this good]. For ten points, name this precious metal whose "Standard" was abandoned by Richard Nixon.
Answer: Gold (

3661. This figure may have invented the plot in which Royalist Cécile Renault [[ray- NOH]] hid two small knives in a bag in an attempt to kill him. With support from the Garde National, the faction known as the Thermidorians ousted (+) this man and sent him to the guillotine [[GEE-yoh-teen]]. The "Reign of Terror'' was (*) overseen by, for ten points, which radical lawyer and head of the Committee of Public Safety during the French Revolution?
Answer: Maximilien Robespierre (or Maximilien François Marie Isidore de Robespierre)

3662. The body of this nation's King Alexander I was thrown off a balcony of the "Old Palace" during its May Coup, which replaced him with Peter I. Alongside Romania and Greece, this nation seized territory from Bulgaria during (+) the Second Balkan War. Austria-Hungary gave this smaller nation the July Ultimatum after nationalist Gavrilo Princip killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Bosnia (*) . For ten points, name this Balkan nation, the most populous constituent of the former Yugoslavia.
Answer: Republic of Serbia (or Republika Srbija

3663. This painting, which was likely completed after Parnassus and La Disputa, is in the first of the four rooms decorated by its artist in the Apostolic (+) Palace. This painting depicts figures as diverse as Ptolemy and Zoroaster, alongside a conversing Plato and Aristotle. (*) For ten points, name this large Renaissance fresco by Raphael depicting the title ideal institution in an ancient Greek city.
Answer: The School of Athens (or Scuola di Atene)

3664. One of this country's literary "superfluous men" fails to win the love of Tatyana after informing her that he will grow bored of marrying her. The creator of that character allegedly inspired the play The Inspector General by another author from this country. The author of Eugene (+) Onegin was from this country, as was another writer whose epileptic son inspired the character Alyosha [[ahl-YOH-shah]] in The Brothers Karamazov. Alexander Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, (*) and Fyodor Dostoyevsky are from, for ten points, which European nation?
Answer: Russia (

3665. A man from this Protestant sect, William Prynne, wrote a scathing critique of mainstream religion called Histriomastix, condemning the excesses of Renaissance theatre. This movement's ban of (+) Christmas celebrations led to riots in southeast England. This Christian sect, of which Oliver Cromwell (*) was a member, dominated the early politics of colonial New England. For ten points, name this religious movement of the UK and the Thirteen Colonies which aimed to purge the Anglican Church of Roman Catholic traditions.
Answer: Puritans BONUS: This company has been a leader in the "microcomputer revolution" and was founded in

3666. This alchemist and pursuer of the philosopher's stone developed a theory of color he discussed in the book Opticks. This scientist's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy explained his law of universal gravitation, developed using a calculus notation he derived independently of Gottfried Leibniz [[LIBE-nitz]]. For ten points, name this English polymath who also theorized three eponymous laws of motion.
Answer: Sir Isaac Newton

3667. This nation's partisans like the BOPA assisted in the evacuation of the majority of its Jewish population to the neutral Kingdom of Sweden. The United States bought the Virgin Islands from this country, and this European nation gave limited autonomy to its colony of Greenland in 1979. Iceland was once controlled by, for ten points, what Scandinavian nation governed from Copenhagen?
Answer: Kingdom of Denmark (or Kongeriget Danmark

3668. In the Life of Saint Boniface, the title saint cuts down a tree sacred to this non-Roman deity in Hesse [[HEH-suh]]. In his treatise Germania, Tacitus [[TASS-ih-tuss]] referred to this god as the "Hercules" of the Suebi [[SWAY-bee]] people, while "Mercury" was the equivalent of Odin. In opposition to the Christianization of Scandinavia, many believers wore charms depicting this god's hammer Mjölnir [[MYOHL-neer]]. For ten points, name this widely- worshipped red-headed Norse god of thunder.
Answer: Thor (

3669. The idea for this work's fourth and final movement was likely borrowed from the work of Luigi Cherubini [[keh-roo-BEE-nee]] and consists of a lengthy coda followed by 29 bars of C Major chords. This piece's composer supposedly told his secretary, Anton Schindler, that its opening motif represented "fate knocking at the door." A famous "short-short-short- long" motif opens, for ten points, what symphony by Ludwig von Beethoven?
Answer: Beethoven's Fifth (or Symphony No. 5 by Ludwig van Beethoven in C minor)

3670. An injury kept this academic from representing the UK at the 1948 Olympics as a marathon runner. A 2017 "Law" named for this scientist provided amnesty to UK men charged under anti-homosexuality legislation. The Battle of the Atlantic began tipping in the favor of the Allies in large part due to this man cracking the German naval Enigma code. A machine which can replicate any computer algorithm is named for, for ten points, which British computer scientist?
Answer: Alan Turing (or Alan Mathison Turing)

3671. Josef Stalin sent employees of this company’s Gorki plant in Nizhny Novgorod to a gulag during the Great Purge. In 1932, more than 60 workers were injured by this company's security and Dearborn police following [this company's] "Hunger March." This company’s “Edsel” line of cars was named for the son of its founder and became synonymous with failure in the 1950s. For ten points, name this company which made the popular Escort, F-Series, and Model T automobiles.
Answer: Ford Motor Company

3672. Several city-states of this civilization were defeated by their rival, Spearthrower Owl, a leader of Teotihuacan [[teh-oh-tee-HWAH-kan]]. The military outpost of Dos Pilas [[PEE- lahss]] switched between this civilization's two rival cities of Calakmul [[kah-lahk-MOOL]] and Tikal [[tee-KAHL]]. The Temple of Kukulcan [[koo-kool-KAHN]] was built in this civilization's settlement of Chichen Itza [[CHEE-chen EE-tzah]]. For ten points, name these Mesoamerican people who developed a namesake "Long Count'' calendar.
Answer: Maya People (or Mayans

3673. Chemist Friedrich Accum [[ah-KUHM]] wrote a treatise concerning this food, denouncing the pre-modern practice of using non-foods such as chalk and sawdust as additives. The scarcity of this foodstuff led to the "March on Versailles" [[vehr-"SIGH"]] by Parisian women in the early French Revolution. In Juvenal's [[JOO-veh-nahls]] Satires, he paired this word with "circuses" to signify mollifying the masses. For ten points, name this staple food of the Western world made from grinding and baking wheat.
Answer: Bread (

3674. During this period, the art of lone storytelling called rakugo grew in popularity as the Chōnin middle class emerged. This period began following a victory by the "Eastern Army" over Toyotomi [[toh-yoh-TOH-mee]] loyalists at the Battle of Sekigahara [[seh-kee-gah-HAH- rah]]. This period's ruling dynasty was weakened when Commodore Matthew Perry forced an end to Sakoku isolation. A clan of Shoguns established by Ieyasu [[ee-eh-YAH-soo]] ruled from modern-day Tokyo in what historical Japanese period?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu

3675. During this war, the burning lights of trailing hospital ships triggered the Battle of Tsushima [[soo-SHE-mah]] Strait, a disastrous loss for the 2nd Pacific Squadron. Teddy Roosevelt earned a Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the Treaty of Portsmouth, which ended this conflict. The Battle of Port Arthur began, for ten points, what war in which Emperor Meiji's [[MAY-jees]] government attempted to curb the influence of a tsarist empire?
Answer: Russo-Japanese War (

3676. While serving under this general, Dubliner Arthur Sandes led a critical charge of riflemen during the Battle of Boyacá [[boh-yah-KAH]]. A series of massacres committed by Royalists led this general to call for the "Decree of War to the Death" during the Admirable Campaign. This military commander served as the autocrat of Gran Colombia until his deposition in 1830. For ten points, name this Latin American "liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar BONUS: This long-time president of Venezuela established a

3677. This man's tweet claiming he could take his company "private at $420 per share" led to him paying 40 million dollars in penalties to the Securities and Exchange Commission. This man's "Boring Company" is testing intra-city travel through the experimental "Hyperloop System," and that company broke off from this businessman's other enterprise, SpaceX. As of September 2021, the wealthiest man on earth is, for ten points, which CEO and founder of Tesla?
Answer: Elon Musk (or Elon Reeve Musk) BONUS: Musk passed which Amazon founder as the wealthiest person in the world? Jeff Bezos (or Jeffrey Preston Bezos

3678. Often incorporating aspects of the cult of Serapis [[seh-RAP-iss]], this deity names a "Mystery" practiced in the Greco-Roman world which guaranteed practitioners a place in the Fortunate Isles. An aspect of this goddess related to "Pharos" [[FAY-rohss]] was worshipped by sailors hoping to have favorable seas. Scholars have speculated that images of this goddess with Horus on her lap inspired iconography of Mary with an infant Christ. Osiris [[oh-"SIGH"- riss]] is resurrected by, for ten points, which sister-wife of his, an Egyptian fertility deity?
Answer: Isis [["EYE"-siss]] (

3679. Don Pellegrini is executed in this city by a Nazi occupation force led by Major Bergmann in a Rossellini film set in this city, which began his "Neo-realist Trilogy." A young Audrey Hepburn appears as Princess Ann in a 1951 film titled for a "Holiday" in this city, visiting sites like the Spanish steps and the Trevi fountain. Ben-Hur's chariot-racing scene occurs in the Colosseum of, for ten points, which Italian capital city?
Answer: Rome (

3680. Welsh settlers immigrated to the south of this modern nation in its Chubut province where its government conducted the "Conquest of the Desert." The Puelches [[PWEL-kess]] people used a system of irrigation in the dry lands of this modern nation's Mendoza province later adapted by the colonial Spanish. This nation's navy sank the Brazilian flotilla during the Battle of Juncal [[hoon-KAHL]]. For ten points, name this South American country, whose capital lies on the southern shores of the Río de la Plata.
Answer: Argentina (

3681. This ruler's namesake "Donation" was a forged 8th century decree claiming he made Rome superior to the other Holy Sees, such as Antioch. This ruler ordered the symbol Chi Rho [[KYE ROE]] to be painted on his soldiers' shields to assure victory at Milvian Bridge. This ruler ended the systemic persecution of Christians through the Edict of Milan. The Council of Nicaea [[ny-SAY-ah]] was called by, for ten points, which "Great '' Roman emperor who created a namesake capital from the city of Byzantium?
Answer: Constantine I (or Constantine the Great

3682. People group in modern-day France over whom he ruled.
Answer: Franks (or Frankish people)

3683. Dynasty he was part of, named for his grandfather, Charles Martel.
Answer: Carolingians (or Carlovingian; or Carolingus; or Karolinger; or Karlings)

3684. Title he took following his crowning by the Pope, later used by medieval rulers of Germany.
Answer: Holy Roman Emperor (or Emperor of the Romans

3685. People who seized much of Italy during the Gothic Wars whom he dislodged from the peninsula in the 770s.
Answer: Lombards (or Langobards)

3686. King of Aquitaine and "Pious" ruler whom he appointed as his successor.
Answer: Louis the Pious (or Louis le Pieux

3687. Scholar in his court who wrote the biography Vita Karoli Magni.
Answer: Einhard (

3688. Kingdom formally annexed by him following the capture and execution of Cleopatra.
Answer: Egypt (or Aegyptos)

3689. Rival and loyal general to Julius Caesar whom Augustus defeated at the naval Battle of Actium.
Answer: Mark Antony (

3690. Building material with which he claimed to have rebuilt Rome.
Answer: Marble

3691. Term used to describe the roughly 200 years of relative stability following his rule.
Answer: Pax Romana

3692. Biblical figure and Client-King for Rome who committed the "Massacre of the Innocents."
Answer: Herod the Great

3693. Title he used instead of imperator to portray himself as an equal to the other denizens of the empire.
Answer: First Citizen (

3694. Leading nation of the Central Powers who attempted to draw them into World War One through the Zimmerman Note.
Answer: German Empire (

3695. Revolutionary during the Mexican Civil War whose raid on Columbus, New Mexico triggered a failed U.S. manhunt.
Answer: Francisco "Pancho" Villa (or José Doroteo Arango Arámbula)

3696. U.S. president who allowed the Bracero [[brah-SEH-roh]] worker program to augment labor during World War Two.
Answer: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (

3697. Industry nationalized by the Lazaro Cardenas government, who formed the company Pemex.
Answer: Oil Industry (or Petroleum Industry)

3698. Guerillas named for a deceased revolutionary who rebelled in Chiapas [[chee-AH- pahss]] following the passage of NAFTA.
Answer: Zapatista Army of

3699. Popular moderate president who was assassinated during the Ten Tragic Days of the Mexican Revolution.
Answer: Francisco Madero (or Francisco Ignacio Madero González)

3700. Following the Battle of Niagara Falls, one side in this war ceased attempts to conquer Canada. One side in this war lost the Battle of the Thames [[TEMZ]] after (+) recruiting Tecumseh's Confederacy. The Treaty of Ghent officially ended this war shortly before Andrew Jackson's forces won the Battle of New Orleans. (*) For ten points, name this early-nineteenth century conflict that rekindled animosity between Great Britain and the United States.
Answer: War of

3701. In the prelude to this battle, one side scored easy victories at Bordeaux [[bor- DOE]] and Narbonne over Duke Odo the Great. During this battle, many Mozarabic soldiers abandoned the general Abd al-Rahman in (+) an effort to protect their own camp from being plundered. Prior to this battle, Pope Gregory III provided a loan to a "Mayor of the Palace" nicknamed "The Hammer" to repel an Umayyad (*) invasion of Gaul. For ten points, name this 732 Frankish victory by Charles Martel.
Answer: Battle of Tours (

3702. Future Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin [[meh-NAH-kem BEH-gin]] sent a parcel bomb meant to kill this nation's head of state, instead killing police officer Karl (+) Reichert [["RYE"-kert]]. This state's "Economic Miracle" was orchestrated by Ludwig Erhard [[EHR-hard]] and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer [[AH-den-ow-uh]] (*). For ten points, name this country, sometimes known as the "Bonn Republic," which reunified with an eastern communist neighbor in 1990.
Answer: West Germany (or West Deutschland

3703. Cuban poet José Martí wrote a Centenario of this man in 1889, calling him a "Hero in Peace and War." Phillis Wheatley (+) wrote, "Proceed, great chief, with virtue on thy side" in an 18th-century poem titled for this politician. Parson Weems composed many stories about this man, including the fable of his chopping down a (*) cherry tree. For ten points, name this literature-inspiring first president of the United States.
Answer: George Washington (

3704. Due to using this network, John van Zandt was taken to court for punitive damages by plantation owner Wharton Jones. "Conductors" who used this network used "stations" as (+) safehouses often run by members of the Quaker denomination including Levi Coffin. The nickname "Moses" was given to this entity's most successful guide, Harriet Tubman. (*) For ten points, name this so-called "railroad," a series of routes used by the enslaved to escape to the Northern U.S. and Canada.
Answer: Underground Railroad

3705. In this country, illegal miners who carry green bowls on their backs are given the nickname "ninja miners." This country's Dukha community, part of the larger Tuvan people, herd (+) reindeer near its Lake Khövsgöl [[HOOVS-gull]]. The Turquoise Hill Mine is a large copper and gold-mining project in this country, where traditional herders live in tents called yurts. The former heartland of the realms of (*) Genghis Khan is in, for ten points, what landlocked East Asian country?
Answer: Mongolia (or Mongol Ulus)

3706. In an attempt to end this war, a cohort of wives threatens to withhold sex from their men in the play Lysistrata. The Aristophanes [["air"-ih-STAH-feh-nees]] play Peace celebrated the recently-signed Peace of Nicias [[nee-KEE-us]] meant (+) to halt this war for fifty years. During this war, the statesman Pericles [[PEH-rih-klees]] gave a funeral oration at a cemetery near the Acropolis. The contemporary Thucydides [[thoo-SIH-dih-dees]] wrote a History of, (*) for ten points, what Greek conflict between two factions led by Athens and Sparta?
Answer: Peloponnesian War

3707. This anti-imperialist openly criticized the U.S. for perpetrating the Moro Crater Massacre in his essay Incident in the Philippines. This author served a two-week stint in a Confederate militia known as the (+) Marion Rangers before deserting. This Missouri man described his time as a steamboat pilot in the antebellum period in Life of on the (*) Mississippi. For ten points, name this writer whose upbringing inspired The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Answer: Mark Twain (or Samuel Langhorne Clemens)

3708. This U.S. president admitted the United States's only pair of twin-born states after shuffling their papers to conceal which was the first admitted. The final state this president admitted, out of six, was the first to grant (+) women the vote as a territory. This president presided over the "Billion Dollar Congress" and signed the Sherman Antitrust (*) Act. For ten points, name this man who was both successor and predecessor of Grover Cleveland.
Answer: Benjamin Harrison (

3709. An 8 inch tall statue of Mao Zedong was placed at this site by an expeditionary team led by Wang Fuzhou [[WAHNG FOO-ZHOH]] who used the "human ladder" technique to reach it. The 1970 Khumbu Icefall killed various local contractors working to prepare Japanese skier Yūichirō Miura's attempt to ski down this peak. This mountain, also called Sagarmatha, was first summitted by Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary. For ten points, name this Himalayan mountain on the Nepal-China border, the highest point on Earth.
Answer: Mount Everest (or Chomolungma

3710. Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner [[DUH-buh-"rye"-nuh]] named a set of triads in an early formulation of this display. John Newlands attempted to create this display, which was inspired by the observations of Lothar Meyer. Some members of this diagram were originally prefixed "eka-," and this diagram once contained entries such as coronium and aether. Containing components like hydrogen and helium, for ten points, what diagram, developed by Dmitri Mendeleev [[men-deh-LEY-eff]], organizes the chemical elements?
Answer: Periodic Table of Elements

3711. At this event, a preacher became famous for saying "Praise the Lord and pass the ammunition" to rally the spirit of the troops. This attack, codenamed Operation Z, began after one side exclaimed, "Tora! Tora! Tora!" This event resulted in the deaths of over 2,000 servicemen, primarily due to the sinking of both the USS Oklahoma and the USS Arizona. For ten points, name this attack on December 7th, 1941, in which Japan bombed a U.S. naval base in Hawaii.
Answer: Attack on Pearl Harbor (

3712. Troops preparing to confront this force were told "I have the heart and stomach of a king" by their leader at Tilbury. This force was commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia and lost at the Battle of Gravelines [[grahv-LEEN]]. Sir Francis Drake helped defeat this force shortly after he attacked Cádiz to "singe the beard of" its nation's ruler, Philip II. For ten points, name this fleet of ships sent by Spain in 1588 in an attempt to conquer England.
Answer: Spanish Armada (or Grande y Felicísima Armada

3713. This politician hired education reformer John Dewey, who suggested switching his country's alphabet to a Latin script. In 1924, this politician formally abolished the last recognized caliph, Abdulmejid II. Following this man's failure to get the League of Nations to annul the Treaty of Sèvres [[SEH-vruh]], this head of the Ankara government launched an invasion of the Greek zone of occupation. The father of modern Turkey was, for ten points, which 20th century politician?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (or Mustafa Kemal Pasha

3714. In Operation Northwoods, the Department of Defense proposed intentionally killing immigrants and blaming it on this nation as a false flag. Freedom fighters used the yacht Granma to sail from Mexico to this nation in the hope of overthrowing Fulgencio Batista. The failure of John F. Kennedy to provide air support doomed the exile-led Bay of Pigs invasion of this nation. The 26th of July Movement led by the Castros took control of, for ten points, what nation?
Answer: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)

3715. This orator gave the speech "An Undefended Land" to preach the dangers of Nazism to the British people. In the poem "The Rowers," this man used the term "Hun" as a derogatory name for the citizens of the German Empire. This Orientalist author used the historical "Great Game" as the backdrop for his novel Kim. The first English recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature was, for ten points, what author of The Jungle Book?
Answer: Rudyard Kipling (or Joseph Rudyard Kipling)

3716. This man once performed a duet with Condoleezza Rice and the following year performed during a recitation of the names of the dead at Ground Zero on the first anniversary of 9/11. This student of Leonard Rose and Pablo Casals typically plays a 1733 Montagnana [[mon-tan-YAH-nuh]] named "Petunia," though he was also bequeathed the Davidov Stradivarius by Jacqueline du Pré. For ten points, name this Chinese-American classical musician, a world-renowned cellist.
Answer: Yo-Yo Ma

3717. This writer documented a six-week marine expedition in the Sea of Cortez and later went "In Search of America" in a rented pickup truck with his poodle. This author of Travels with Charley won a Pulitzer Prize for a novel in which Jim Casy is beaten to death after the Joad family travels to California during the Dust Bowl. For ten points, name this American author known for his Depression-era stories of California, including The Grapes of Wrath.
Answer: John Steinbeck (or John Ernst Steinbeck, Jr.) BONUS: Steinbeck considered his magnum opus to be this

3718. This celebrity served as the public face of the America First Committee, which pressured the government of Franklin D. Roosevelt to remain neutral during the Second World War. This Medal of Honor recipient traveled over 3,000 miles in his personal airplane, The Spirit of St. Louis. For ten points, name this American aviator who did the first non-stop, solo flight across the Atlantic.
Answer: Charles Lindbergh (or Charles Augustus Lindbergh) BONUS: While on a tour of Germany, Lindbergh was presented with various medals by this Nazi head of the Luftwaffe [[LOOFT-vah-fah]] who earlier created the Gestapo [[geh-SHTAH- poh]]. Hermann Göring [[GEH-ring]] (or Hermann Wilhelm Göring; be lenient on pronunciation)

3719. One king of these people named Cetshwayo [[ketsh-"WHY"-oh]] had his cause taken up by Lady Florence Dixie after spending two years in exile. Following a victory for these people at Isandlwana [[ee-sahn-JWAH-nah]], a contingent of their soldiers were cornered and defeated at Rorke's Drift. The "horn of the buffalo" formation was used by a regiment of these people known as the Impi. The conquests of Shaka led to the establishment of an empire of, for ten points, what people in Southern Africa?
Answer: Zulu (or amaZulu) BONUS: At the Battle of Blood River, 500 of these Dutch-descended travelers defeated 15,000 Zulu warriors. They fought a namesake war with the British at the turn of the 20th century. Boers (

3720. The "Praises of Italy" passage is found in a treatise concerning this subject written by Virgil known as the Georgics. Dactylic hexameter is used in another treatise on this subject by Hesiod [[HEH-see-ud]] known as Works and Days, imploring the reader to pray to Demeter. Cato the Elder describes the virtues of animal husbandry and plowing, both subsets of, for ten points, what discipline in his work, De Agricultura?
Answer: Farming (

3721. This god is commonly depicted with Ganga [[GUNG-guh]] flowing from his matted hair and with a third eye that he used to destroy the god of love, Kama. This god beheaded his wife's son and guard before giving him the head of an elephant. This father of Kartikeya [[kar- tih-KEH-yah]] and Ganesh [[gah-NESH]] is the husband of Parvati. For ten points, name this Hindu god of destruction, who makes up the Trimurti with Brahma and Vishnu.
Answer: Shiva (

3722. A Soviet Republic based in this city collapsed after its leader, Eugen Leviné [[leh-vee- NEH]], was shot in Stadelheim [[SHTAH-del-hime]] Prison. A conference named for this city resulted in Nazi Germany receiving the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia. The SA and Adolf Hitler led the "Beer Hall Putsch" in this city. For ten points, name this southern German city, which is the capital and largest city of Bavaria.
Answer: Munich (

3723. One of these groups named Hispana vanishes from history around 120 AD and is known as the "lost '' one of these groups. Marius made these groups permanent standing bodies and professionalized their subcommanders, the centurions. These groups each consisted of over 5000 infantry members and 120 foreign auxilia cavalry during the height of the Empire, at which time there were as many as thirty of them. For ten points, name these highest-level divisions of the Roman army.
Answer: Roman Legions (

3724. In the aftermath of a revolt by this figure, the freedman Polyclitus [[pah-lee-KLY- tuss]] led an investigation that deposed governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus [["GUY"-us swee- TOH-nee-us paw-"LIE"-nuss]]. This woman's husband, Prasutagus [[prah-soo-TAY-gus]], originally submitted to vassal status during the conquests of Claudius. With the Trinovantes [[trih-noh-VAN-teez]], this woman's combined tribal army burned down both Eboracum [[eh-BOR-sh-kum]] and Londinium. For ten points, name this queen of the Iceni [["eye"-SEE- nee]] tribe who led Britons in a 1st century revolt against the Roman Empire.
Answer: Boudicca (

3725. Conservative PM of the 1980s, dubbed "The Iron Lady."
Answer: Margaret Thatcher (or Margaret Hilda Thatcher; or Baroness Thatcher)

3726. Former mayor of London who led the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Answer: Boris Johnson (or Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson)

3727. PM who declared "Peace in Our Time" after appeasing Hitler.
Answer: (Arthur) Neville Chamberlain

3728. Son of an "Elder" PM who oversaw the end of the American Revolution.
Answer: William Pitt the Younger (do not

3729. Liberal PM who gave the Midlothian Campaign speeches and opposed Disraeli.
Answer: William Gladstone (or William Ewart [a]Gladstone)

3730. De facto first PM, in power during the beginning of the War of the Austrian Succession.
Answer: Robert Walpole, 1st Earl of Orford

3731. Political scientist and writer of The Prince who was tortured and exiled from Florence.
Answer: Niccolò Machiavelli (or Niccolò di Bernardo dei Machiavelli)

3732. Banking family, with members like Cosimo and Lorenzo, who ruled Florence.
Answer: de' Medici (or House of Medici)

3733. Region in which Florence is located, named for an Italian people of antiquity.
Answer: Tuscany (or Toscana

3734. 11th century dogmatic split which the 15th century Council of Florence aimed to mend.
Answer: Great Schism (or Schism of 1054)

3735. Large-scale burning of fine arts and other objects considered lewd by the followers of Savonarola [[sah-voh-nah-ROH-lah]].
Answer: Bonfire of the Vanities (or Falò delle vanità)

3736. Sculptor who won a competition to design the title fixture for the Florence Cathedral's dome.
Answer: Filippo Brunelleschi [[broo-nuh-LES-kee]] (

3737. Nomadic tribe whose Yuan Dynasty was overthrown by the native Ming emperors.
Answer: Mongols (or Mongolians)

3738. Northern city, formerly called Dadu, which they established as their capital.
Answer: Beijing (or Peking)

3739. Semi-nomadic people group who overthrew them and established the Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty.
Answer: Manchus

3740. Eunuch and Chinese admiral who commanded the Ming Treasure fleets.
Answer: Zheng He [[ZHUNG HUH]] (or Cheng Ho

3741. European religious order for whom Matteo Ricci [[REE-chee]] and Francis Xavier led missions to Ming China.
Answer: Jesuits (

3742. Material mass-produced at the Jingdezhen [[JING-DEH-ZHEN]] kilns for export to Europe.
Answer: Ceramics (

3743. This deity was worshipped in Sparta under an epithet that translates to "Willow-Bound." This deity, dubbed "of the Golden Shaft" was a patron of childbirth despite her personal (+) chastity. Though this goddess's main cult centers were at Brauron [[BRAW-rahn]] and her birthplace of Delos, a temple dedicated to this deity at Ephesus [[eh-FEH-soos]] was one of the Seven (*) Ancient Wonders of the World. For ten points, name this twin sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.
Answer: Artemis (

3744. This man supposedly diverted an invasion of Britannia to have his army collect seashells along the English Channel. While campaigning with his father, Germanicus, this man earned a nickname related to wearing (+) a child's version of a military outfit. This emperor, who was assassinated by the Praetorian Guard, supposedly tried to make his horse (*) Incitatus [[in-kih-TAH-tuhss]] a Roman consul. For ten points, name this insane successor of Tiberius, whose name translates to "Little Boot."
Answer: Caligula (

3745. The loser of this battle sent his Imperial Guard to capture La Haye Sainte and Plancenoit [[PLAHN-sen-NWAH]] but was later pushed back by Foot Guards under Sir Peregrine (+) Maitland. After his Prussians were defeated at the Battle of Ligny [[leen-YEE]], two days before this battle, Gebhard von Blücher [[BLOO-kuh]] withdrew north to (*) Wavre [[WAHV]]. For ten points, name this 1815 battle at which the Seventh Coalition led by the Duke of Wellington ensured the final defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte.
Answer: Battle of Waterloo (

3746. One group who performed this art form premiered their first piece, Le Pavillon d'Armide [[luh pah-vee-YOHN dar-MEED]], in Paris in 1909, following it up with Prince Igor, both of which were choreographed by Michel Fokine [[mee-SHEL foh-KEEN]]. (+) Sergei Diaghilev [[de-AH-guh-lef]] founded an influential Russian company known for this art form, music for which included The Firebird and The Rite of Spring by Igor (*) Stravinsky. For ten points, name this art form of performative dance, practiced by Anna Pavlova and Vaslav Nijinsky.
Answer: Ballet (

3747. Exposure to the chemical Pyridostigmine [["pie"-rih-doh-STIG-meen]] Bromide led to this war's namesake "syndrome," a debilitating chronic illness common among U.S. (+) veterans. The end of this war's hostilities have partially been attributed to photos released of the Highway of Death. This month-long war used the codename Desert Storm. The invasion of (*) Kuwait by Iraq triggered, for ten points, what U.S.-led invasion during the George H.W. Bush administration?
Answer: First Persian Gulf War (

3748. The prevalence of these people led the citizens of Sarawak to crown the "White Rajah" James Brooke after he agreed to drive them out of the nation. Until their decline after the Treaty of Gyehae [["guy"-HAY]], a group of these people called the Wokou (+) plagued the Ming Dynasty. Julius Caesar was captured and ransomed by Cilician [[sih- LIH-shun]] men in this profession, whom he later crucified for their crimes. (*) For ten points, name this profession characterized by robbery and extortion via ship.
Answer: Pirates (

3749. In this province, the Solidarity Coalition led by Jack Munro led a general strike in the early 1980s made up of 100,000 strikers. The Tsimshian [[sihm-SHE-ahn]] people of this province built totem poles and hosted potlach [[POT-latch]] (+) ceremonies. The term "Fifty-Four Forty or Fight'' concerned the border dispute between the Oregon territory and this modern province. Royal Navy officer George Vancouver names (*) the largest city of, for ten points, what Canadian province?
Answer: British Columbia (

3750. Using the codename Bolek, this man likely informed on his fellow workingmen regarding dissident matters such as listening to Radio Free Europe. This electrician led a strike of (+) 17,000 workers at the Lenin Shipyards in Gdansk [[guh-DANSK]]. This man achieved semi-free elections following the Round Table Agreements held in Warsaw. The leader of the trade union (*) Solidarity was, for ten points, what first president of a democratic Poland?
Answer: Lech Wałęsa [[LEK vah-WEHN-sah]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

3751. Between 1854 and 1855, three of these events named Tokai, Nankai, and Edo were collectively known as the Ansei. Goto Shinpei led infrastructure projects following a 1923 example of these events, which mostly did not impact Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel. For the point, name these natural disasters that included the Great Kanto, which destroyed many buildings in Japan.
Answer: Earthquakes (

3752. A constitution in this language authored by Lorrin A. Thurston was signed "under absolute compulsion" by the king. This language, whose revitalization efforts have been led by publications such as the Star-Advertiser, has been heavily preserved on Ni'hau. This language was banned from schools in 1896 after a monarch was overthrown for attempting to rewrite the Bayonet Constitution. For the point, name this language of figures like Queen Lili’uokalani [["lily"-woh-kah-LAH-nee]] on a namesake island chain.
Answer: Hawaiian language (

3753. The rise of military governors known as Shugo eventually evolved into this title during the early Muromachi Period under the Ashikaga. A new aristocratic class known as the kazoku, which worked on a system of hereditary peerage, replaced this noble class following the Meiji Restoration. For the point, name these powerful Japanese lords who served as vassals of the Shogun.
Answer: Daimyos (

3754. This man gave the Laconia Order, which resulted in a rescue operation by the Axis after Werner Hartenstein unintentionally sank a British passenger ship. Following Hitler's suicide, this admiral served for nearly a month as president of Germany in a government with Chancellor Goebbels [[GEHR-buls]]. The creator of the "wolfpack" tactics used by U-Boats, for the point, who was this Nazi admiral, the Supreme Commander of the German Navy during World War Two?
Answer: Karl Dönitz [[DUHR-nitz]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

3755. The Imperial response to this event was weakened due to the cost of recent annexations of the Vandalic and Gothic kingdoms. Court historian Procopius claimed that this pandemic killed over 10,000 people daily in Constantinople. For the point, name this "Plague" caused by yersinia pestis, often named for an ambitious 6th century Byzantine Emperor.
Answer: Plague of Justinian (or Justinianic Plague

3756. This man defeated the pirate Chen Zuyi at the Battle of Palembang during a series of expeditions documented in the Mao-Kun map. This leader brought back a giraffe from Malindi after visiting the Swahili Coast. This man’s projects were stopped under the isolationist Hongxi [[HONG-SHEE]] Emperor following the death of his sponsor, the Yongle [[YONG- LUH]] Emperor. For the point, name this Chinese Muslim explorer during the Ming dynasty.
Answer: Zheng He [[ZHUNG-HUH]] (

3757. Despite being in Miami at the time, this person was believed to have been responsible for the death of seven associates of Bugs Moran. This person said “they can’t collect legal taxes from illegal money” before being arrested by Eliot Ness on charges of income tax evasion. The first person to be labeled as “Public Enemy No. 1” was, for the point, what U.S. gangster who ordered the St. Valentine’s Day Massacre in Chicago?
Answer: Al Capone (or Alphonse Gabriel Capone

3758. In 1908, this scientist won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for discovering alpha and beta particles. With Ernest Marsden and Hans Geiger, this scientist conducted an experiment in which alpha particles were bombarded against sheets of gold foil. Often regarded as the “father of nuclear physics,” for the point, what physicist discovered the concept of radioactive half-life and the atomic nucleus?
Answer: Ernest Rutherford (or 1st Baron Rutherford of Nelson)

3759. This event's central figure wrote the controversial Sidereus Nuncius [[NOON-kee-us]]. That figure at the center of this event was found "vehemently suspect of heresy" after publishing Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. For the point, name this "Trial” involving an Italian astronomer who may have uttered the phrase "and yet it moves" in support of heliocentrism.
Answer: Trial of Galileo Galilei (

3760. The Vandal kingdom promoted Arianism in this city, their capital, which was captured in the 5th century. After moving to this North African city, Saint Augustine of Hippo converted from Manichaeism [[man-ih-KAY-ism]] to Christianity. The biblical canon of the Western Church was confirmed at a council named for, for the point, which African city that fought the Punic Wars with Rome?
Answer: Carthage (

3761. This British prime minister inspired the nickname for the "Who? Who? Ministry," because he didn't recognize any of the names on the list of cabinet members. This general had the Lines of Torres Vedras built to protect Lisbon during the Peninsular War and led the Seventh Coalition in a victory which ended the "Hundred Days." For the point, name this British general who defeated Napoleon at Waterloo.
Answer: Duke of Wellington (

3762. Bactrian governor Bardiya ruled for a brief interim before this ruler took the throne after claiming he was a son of Cyrus the Great. The Ionian Revolt prompted this man to plan an invasion of the Greek mainland which ended with a loss at Marathon. For the point, name this Achaemenid [[ah-KIM-uh-nid]] king who created the "satrapy" [[SAT-rah-pee]] system and brought Persia to its largest territorial extent.
Answer: Darius I (

3763. During a siege of this city, a woman named La Malinche [[la-mah-LEEN-keh]] helped the invading Spanish by serving as an interpreter. Sacrifices to Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-zee-loh-POHKT-lee]] were made at this city's Templo Mayor complex. The capital of New Spain, Mexico City, was built on the ruins of, for the point, which Aztec capital?
Answer: Tenochtitlan (

3764. During this war, Saxony and Brandenburg-Prussia led the formation of the Heilbronn League in the wake of the Battle of Lutzen. This war began when Protestants led by Count Thum [[TOOM]] committed the "Second Defenestration of Prague." For the point, name this 17th-century war primarily fought in Germany, ended by a series of agreements of Westphalia.
Answer: Thirty Years' War (

3765. The assault on this city began with the Battle of Sarimbun Beach. Winston Churchill called the surrender of this city the "worst disaster in British military history." This city's capture was the culmination of the Malayan campaign and involved Japanese use of bicycle infantry. For the point, name this "Gibraltar of the East" that fell to the Japanese after a weeklong battle in 1942.
Answer: Singapore (

3766. The use of fiberglass and soundproofing became common in vessels designed for this activity, whose German practitioners were referred to as "very much the unsung heroes of the Kriegsmarine." Right-clicking can lead to the setting of a red flag in a game named for this military task, which involves use of towed bodies such as "oropesas" to clip dangerous objects. For the point, name this task of destroying certain bombs in open waters.
Answer: Minesweeping (

3767. This thinker disproved Plato’s claim that man is a “featherless biped” when he presented him with a plucked chicken and said, “Behold! I’ve brought you a man!” This thinker was an alleged pupil of Antisthenes and believed his teacher was the “true heir” of Socrates. Using an old tub as his home, for the point, what philosopher from Sinope [[sin-OH- pee]] was a founder of Cynicism?
Answer: Diogenes [[dye-AH-jeh-neez]] of Sinope (or Diogenes the Cynic)

3768. A man donning a jacket cursing this event was the subject of a Supreme Court case in which an opinion by Justice John Harlan read, “One man’s vulgarity is another’s lyric.” On his first full day in office, Jimmy Carter issued Proclamation 4483 which pardoned those who avoided this event. The Catonsville [[KAY-tuns-vil]] Nine and Paul Robert Cohen protested, for the point, what event that made it mandatory for men to serve in a certain conflict in Southeast Asia?
Answer: Vietnam War draft (or Vietnam War conscription

3769. The Hudson’s Bay Company sponsored George Simpson to accomplish this task mostly by land. The Pelican was utilized in an English attempt to accomplish this feat authorized by Elizabeth I and overseen by a man who fought the Spanish Armada. Francis Drake accomplished this feat, originally completed by a Portuguese expedition whose leader was killed in the Philippines. For the point, name this travel feat first completed by the fleet of Ferdinand Magellan.
Answer: Circumnavigating the Earth (

3770. The second movement of this piece was performed at the funerals at the eleven Israeli athletes killed at the 1972 Summer Olympics. This symphony, the second movement of which is a C minor funeral march, was rededicated to Joseph Franz Maximilian and, ultimately, to "the memory of a great man" after Napoleon crowned himself emperor. Often considered the first "Romantic" symphony, for the point, what is this third symphony by Ludwig van Beethoven?
Answer: Eroica Symphony (

3771. The short-lived West Indies Federation had this city's port of Chaguaramas [[shah- gwah-RAH-mahs]] as its official capital. This majority Indian nation was named after Christopher Columbus spotted three adjacent hills which he called the Spanish word for "Trinity." Eric Williams was the first and longest-serving prime minister of, for the point, what country north of Venezuela, governed from Port of Spain?
Answer: Republic of Trinidad and Tobago (

3772. Much of the force which was to assist in Operation Dynamo, the planned evacuation at Dunkirk, massed in this port due to its relative proximity. This member of the historical "Cinque [[SEENK]] Ports" inspired the poet Matthew Arnold to write a poem titled for its "Beach." Chalk makes up the White Cliffs of, for the point, what Kentish city, the former site of the Roman Portus Dubris?
Answer: Dover (

3773. A Historically, a king or a priest would often play this deity in dramas in which they struck a live hippopotamus with a harpoon. Those performances took place during the Hab Nekhtet, or the Festival of Victory, that celebrated this deity. The largest temple dedicated to this deity is the Temple of Edfu, built in the Ptolemaic period. For the point, what falcon- headed deity was the patron of kings in Ancient Egypt?
Answer: Horus (or Heru; or Hor; or Har

3774. The main actor of this film almost boycotted its premiere upon hearing his co-star, Hattie McDaniel, was denied entry due to the state’s Jim Crow laws. The first African- American to win an Academy Award, Hattie McDaniel, won Best Supporting Actress for this film. Starring Vivien Leigh [[LEE]] and Clark Gable, for the point, what 1939 romance film is set during the American Civil War?
Answer: Gone with the Wind

3775. The inclusion of both a cane and a sword in one sculpture have led to speculation that this person was meant to be compared to Cincinnatus. The year 1788 is inscribed in that statue of this person despite being finished at least three years later by Jean-Antoine Houdon [[hoo-DOHN]]. For the point, identify this person whose life mask and measurements were taken when the sculptor visited Mount Vernon.
Answer: George Washington

3776. An anti-religion campaign may have led to the false attribution of a quote to this man in which he supposedly said that he “didn’t see any God” during his most famous undertaking. A MiG-15 crash killed this man, who once served at Luostari Air Base. This backup crew member of Soyuz 1 was best-known for a single 1961 orbit. For the point, name this Soviet cosmonaut and first man in space.
Answer: Yuri Gagarin (or Yuri Alexeyivich Gagarin)

3777. Rhumb lines were used in a 1569 depiction of this location that was itself inspired by a work known as “Theatre of [this place]" by Abraham Ortelius. The “pocket” variety of one type of depiction of this place was popularized among elites in the 17th century. Many depictions of this place were made during the Golden Age of Flemish cartography, including the Mercator Projection. For the point, name this planet depicted on atlases and globes.
Answer: The World (or Earth

3778. This man's participation in the Battle of Boju has been challenged by his notable absence from the Commentary of Zuo. This man was listed as a minister to King Helu of Wu by Sima Qian [[CHEE-ahn]], and his descendant, Bin, wrote a book with the same title as this man's more famous work. That book by this man includes chapters on "Attacking with Fire" and "The Army on the March." For the point, name this Chinese general and author of The Art of War.
Answer: Sun Tzu (or Sun Zi; or Sun Wu

3779. This empire's only African colony in Maputo was wiped out by malaria. This state lost Venetia after the Seven Weeks' War against the Prussians. This empire's heir apparent was killed in Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip in an event that kickstarted World War One. For the point, name this dual monarchy with capitals at Vienna and Budapest.
Answer: Austria-Hungary Empire (

3780. Korean activist Lee Bong-chang tried to kill this man in the Sakuradamon [[SA-koo- rad-uh-MON]] Incident. This man authorized the use of toxic gas during the Battle of Wuhan and cited the Five Charter Oath while denouncing his divinity in the Humanity Declaration. Prime Minister Hideki Tojo served, for the point, what emperor who delivered the Jewel Voice Broadcast and led Japan during World War Two?
Answer: Hirohito (

3781. One ruler of this empire successfully launched the Siege of Golconda. This empire lost land during conflicts between the French and British known as the Carnatic Wars. The Red Fort was the imperial residence for rulers of this empire that was established after victory at the First Battle of Panipat. For the point, identify this Indian empire founded by Babur and once ruled by Akbar the Great.
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Mogul Empire; or Moghul Empire)

3782. This organization worked in tandem with the Tupac Amaru movement to control countryside communities known as Rondas. Abimael Guzman called for this organization to undertake the "People's War," which included a campaign of terrorism in Lima. For the point, name this guerrilla movement of Peru, a Maoist insurgency eradicated by Alberto Fujimori.
Answer: Shining Path (or Sendero Luminoso

3783. This country's Barakzai dynasty was toppled by a coup led by Mohammed Daoud Khan, who was later usurped in this country's Saur Revolution. Hamid Karzai was once president of this country that was invaded by the Soviets in a conflict during which Pashtun rebels joined the Mujahedeen. For the point, name this Middle Eastern country where the Taliban sieged Kabul.
Answer: (Islamic, Democratic) Republic of Afghanistan (

3784. A ruler of this city named Kaleb invaded the Kingdom of Himyar on the request of Byzantine Emperor Justin. The Zagwe dynasty replaced a family that ruled from this Tigrayan city, whose rulers spoke the Ge’ez [[GEZ]] language. The bishop Frumentius converted a ruler of this city, Ezena, to Christanity. For the point, name this city in northern Ethiopia that was the capital of a namesake empire.
Answer: Axum (

3785. This man sent 230 military advisers to aid Agostinho [[AGG-uh-stee-nyoh]] Neto’s MPLA in the Angolan Civil War. This man led his country through the Special Period of Time and Peace after he organized a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks. This man established his country as a one-party communist state after leading an overthrow of Fulgencio Batista. For the point, name this revolutionary who led Cuba from 1959-2008.
Answer: Fidel Castro (or Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz)

3786. A court painter patronized by this dynasty created the scroll painting Along the River During the Qingming [[CHING-MING]] Festival. This dynasty’s “Southern Period” began when the Jurchen Jin Dynasty conquered its capital of Kaifeng [[KYE-FEHNG]]. Inventions during this dynasty include the compass and gunpowder. For the point, name this Chinese dynasty that was conquered by the Mongols.
Answer: Song dynasty (or Sòng cháo)

3787. This city experienced the “Thirty Tyrants” period. Cleisthenes [[KLY-stheh-neez]] established this city as a deme [[DEH-meh]] in the 5th century BCE, and this port in Attica is where Plato's Republic begins. The modern iteration of this city is the largest passenger port in Europe, while its ancient counterpart served as the primary port of the Delian League. The Long Walls ran from Athens to, for the point, what nearby port city on the Aegean Sea?
Answer: Piraeus (or Peiraiás

3788. This man was elected to his role in 1978 after his predecessor died just 33 days into his term. This man's tenure included the creation of the World Youth Day initiative. This spiritual leader was the first pope to pray at the Western Wall in Jerusalem, and the first pope born outside of Italy in more than 400 years. For the point, name this long-serving Polish pope who was canonized in 2014.
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or Karol Józef Wojtyła [[VOY-tee-wah]])

3789. During this war, Garnet Wolseley led a relief force to assist the besieged general "Chinese" Gordon in the Emin Pasha Expedition. During this war, future Secretary of War Herbert Kitchener implemented the first use of hollow point munitions known as "Dum Dum" bullets at the Battle of Omdurman. Sufi religious figure Muhammad Ahmad led, for the point, which late 19th century revolt in Sudan?
Answer: Mahdist War (

3790. An attack at Nairn that preceded this battle was planned by George Murray, who attempted to recreate a similar success as at Prestonpans. The nickname "Butcher" was given to Prince William, Duke of Cumberland after this battle, which was a defeat for the Stuart royal Bonnie Prince Charlie. For the point, name this decisive battle fought in the Scottish Highlands during the 1745 Jacobite Uprising.
Answer: Battle of Culloden (

3791. With Manius Acilius [[ah-KIL-ee-us]] Glabrio, this man defeated a combined Aetolian League and Seleucid army under Antiochus the Great at the 191 BC Battle of Thermopylae. This writer of the Italian historiography Origins had a "Younger" relative of the same name who opposed the rise of Caesar. The phrase "Carthago delenda est" ended all the speeches of, for the point, what Roman orator who encouraged the Third Punic War?
Answer: Cato (

3792. This person included the groundbreaking "Note G" while translating an article about the “analytical machine.” For several years, this illegitimate daughter of Lord Byron corresponded with Charles Babbage and helped him refine his invention, which was then known as a "difference engine." For the point, name this woman, arguably the first computer programmer.
Answer: Ada Lovelace (

3793. It's not Russia, but Jewish people in fixed income occupations known as Arendator were attacked in this state during the Khmelnytsky [[mehl-NIT-skee]] Uprising. This state lost one-third of its population during the Swedish Deluge, and this union formed after Duke Jogaila [[yah-GEH-wah]] married Queen Jadwiga [[yahd-WEE-gah]]. The cities of Krakow and Warsaw served as the capital of, for the point, what early modern state which experienced three partitions?
Answer: Poland-Lithuania (

3794. Following this war, the "Three No's" was put forth, which refused to trade, recognize, or declare peace with an adversarial neighbor. The three-year long War of Attrition followed this war's swift conclusion, with Gamal Abdel Nasser supporting low-intensity warfare in the occupied Sinai Peninsula. The long-lasting occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip occurred after, for the point, what short-lived war between Israel and its Arab neighbors in the 1960s?
Answer: Six-Day War (

3795. An attack on the Bonanza mine in this country was overseen by a man who, while visiting Mexico, established close ties with the Salvadoran revolutionary Farabundo Marti. Jose Maria Moncada and Adolfo Diaz served as leaders of this country, the latter of whom granted the U.S. rights to build a canal through its namesake lake. For the point, guerillas loyal to Augusto Sandinho, the Sandinistas, operated in what Central American country southeast of Honduras?
Answer: Republic of Nicaragua (

3796. During this man’s reign, the alimenta, a welfare program that helped orphans and poor children, was formed and funded by putting mortgages on farms throughout Italy. This man sacked Ctesiphon, capital of the Parthian Empire, and commemorated his victory against the Dacians [[DAY-shuns]] in a namesake "Column." For the point, name this second of the Five Good Emperors, declared the “best ruler” by the Roman Senate.
Answer: Trajan (or Caesar Nerva Traianus

3797. This man once set his boat, the Tigris, on fire off the coast of Djibouti to protest war in the Middle East. One book by this man describes another expedition that sailed from Morocco to Barbados and was named after the Egyptian deity Ra. For the point, name this Norwegian adventurer and experimental archeologist whose travels across the Pacific in a balsa wood raft are chronicled in the book Kon-Tiki.
Answer: Thor Heyerdahl

3798. A nation in what is now this country defeated Leopold the Just in the 14th-century Battle of Sempach. Allied forces in this country put down a separatist revolt in the Sonderbund War. In 1979, this country's region of Jura became its newest canton. For the point, identify this Central European country whose permanent neutrality was granted at the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Switzerland (or Swiss Confederation

3799. This man, who may have coined the term "Armchair General," assisted in organizing the Convention of Tauroggen, which created an anti-Napoleonic coalition in 1812. This man described the uncertainty of ongoing battles as the "Fog of War," and he said, "War was the Continuation of Politics by another means." For the point, name this 19th century German military theorist who wrote On War.
Answer: Karl von Clausewitz (or Carl Philipp Gottfried (or Gottlieb) von Clausewitz

3800. This person once confronted the local managers of Johnson Controls with the “Downsizer of the Year Award” and an 80 cent check for “the first hour’s wage for a Mexican worker.” This person enraged Ray Bradbury after he parodied a Bradbury novel's title in one of his films. This person said, “Shame on you, Mr. Bush!” after winning an Oscar for Bowling for Columbine. For the point, what controversial American filmmaker created documentaries such as The Big One and Fahrenheit 9/11?
Answer: Michael Moore (or Michael Francis Moore)

3801. Thanks to this man’s connection with Maximilian I, he was given possession of the County of Kirchberg. This man funded Charles V's election as Holy Roman Emperor and built a namesake chapel in St. Anne's Church, as well as the oldest social housing project in the world. For the point, name this German banker and merchant, considered the richest man in early modern Europe.
Answer: Jakob Fugger of the Lily (

3802. Tracts known as “Communal Areas” were claimed for resettlement purposes as part of a mass land redistribution campaign in this country during the 2000s. An image of a sign reading “Starving Billionaire” was used by media outlets to bring attention to hyperinflation in this country whose longtime ruler was in power from 1987 to 2017. Former vice president Emmerson Mnangagwa [[mm-nahn-GAH-gwah]] has governed this country since 2017. For the point, name this African country once led by Robert Mugabe.
Answer: Republic of Zimbabwe (or Nyika yeZimbabwe)

3803. The Earl of Arran served as regent for this person, who faced the Chaseabout raid. This wife of Lord Darnley may have recorded her guilt in a conspiracy with the Earl of Bothwell in the Casket Letters. Francis Walsingham implicated this woman in that conspiracy, which was known as the Babington Plot. For the point, name this Queen of Scotland who was executed by Elizabeth I.
Answer: Mary, Queen of Scots (

3804. This woman, who served as assistant to Official Party Photographer Heinrich Hoffman, supposedly overrode armament minister Albert Speer's call for a ban on women's luxury goods in 1943. The only time this woman appeared in official press photographs was during the 1936 Berlin Olympics. For the point, name this mistress-turned-wife of Adolf Hitler, whose life ended alongside him in the Fuhrerbunker.
Answer: Eva Braun (or Eva Anna Paula Braun

3805. This civilization’s Phaistos Disc is an early example of typographic print and is inscribed with symbols similar to this civilization’s undeciphered language, Linear A. An eruption on Thera made this civilization vulnerable to the Mycenaeans, who succeeded them as the dominant civilization on Crete. For the point, name this early Greek civilization whose namesake king built the Labyrinth.
Answer: Minoan Civilization (

3806. During this period, an outnumbered Polish force partially composed of Hussars defeated Dmitry Shuisky at the Battle of Klushino. The Treaty of Stolvobo ended this period and ceded the province of Ingria to Gustavus Adolphus. This period is generally considered to have ended with the rise of Michael I. The death of Boris Godunov began, for the point, what tumultuous period of 16th and 17th century Russia?
Answer: Time of Troubles (

3807. Before this event, Olympic gold-medalist Terry McDermott posed for a photo pretending to cut the hair of one of the performers. A caption read “SORRY GIRLS, HE’S MARRIED” when introducing one performer during this event. The music video for the Outkast song “Hey Ya!” was inspired by this landmark televised event. Sparking the start of the “British Invasion,” for the point, what 1964 event televised the debut of a Liverpool band to American audiences?
Answer: The Beatles

3808. A claimant to this position from the House of Aberffraw died while attempting to escape the Tower of London after falling from a knotted rope. The last native ruler to hold this title, Llywelyn [[loo-EL-len]], died while fighting the English during the Battle of Orewin Bridge. For the point, name this title now held by Charles of Edinburgh, traditionally held by the heir apparent to the British throne.
Answer: Prince of Wales (

3809. In this region, Hamilton Disston purchased over four million acres of land near St. Cloud to build canals. One book about this region is subtitled River of Grass and was written by Marjory Stoneman Douglass. This region's drainage was accelerated under the administration of Governor Napoleon Bonaparte Broward. Home to the assimilated Seminole people, for the point, what is this large region of marshy wetlands in South Florida?
Answer: The Everglades (

3810. Alexander the Great prayed for this deity to cast a four-horse chariot before heading to the Battle of Issus. This god’s temple in the city of Mantinea was restored by Hadrian while another temple on Cape Sounion was strategically placed in view of all incoming and exiting ships. For the point, who is the Greek god of horses, storms, and the sea?
Answer: Poseidon (do not

3811. During his exile, this leader received the backing of Haitian president Alexandre Pétion. While leading the Admirable Campaign, this man joined the army of the United Provinces and issued The Decree of War to the Death, which permitted the murder of Spanish-born civilians who did not actively support his cause. For the point, name this president of Gran Colombia, known to some as "The Liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

3812. The USS Lexington raided this archipelago after three American ships were captured in a seal hunting dispute. An undeclared war over this archipelago and the South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands was fought when Leopoldo Galtieri claimed sovereignty over Las Islas Malvinas. For the point, name this island chain fought over in a 1982 war between Argentina and the United Kingdom.
Answer: Falkland Islands (

3813. According to Nestor’s account in The Primary Chronicle, this man was the leader of the Varangians before being succeeded by Oleg. The Ladoga region was taken over by this man in the ninth century. The Principality of Tver and Ruthenia were ruled by houses named for this man, including one led by Vladimir the Great. For the point, name this legendary prince whose namesake dynasty ruled Kievan Rus and various Grand Duchies.
Answer: Rurik (or Rorik

3814. To run their distant regions, these people used an administrative official named the tudun, borrowed from their former overlord, the Göktürks. One leader of this steppe people supposedly converted to a monotheistic faith in the 8th century to assert independence from both the Umayyad Caliphate and the Byzantine Empire. For the point, name these semi- nomadic Turkic people, whose nobles may have converted to Judaism.
Answer: Khazars (

3815. A fleet led by this man and the Earl of Cumberland captured the Portuguese vessel Madre de Deus. This man lost favor with the monarchy through a secret marriage to lady-in- waiting Elizabeth Throckmorton. During a voyage to find El Dorado, this man violated the terms of his release from the Tower of London and was summarily executed. For the point, identify this explorer, a favorite of Elizabeth I.
Answer: Sir Walter Raleigh

3816. Antoine Watteau depicted French aristocrats traveling to this figure's home in Pilgrimage to Cythera. Ancient Greek artist Zeuxis [[ZOOK-siss]] supposedly died laughing after casting an old woman to model this figure. Titian painted a reclining nude of this figure at the behest of his patron, the Duke of Urbino. For the point, name this Greco-Roman goddess whose "Birth" is depicted in a Botticelli work.
Answer: Aphrodite (

3817. An officer of these military units known as the Towarzysz [[tah-WAHR-zeez]] wore a leopard pelt over his shoulder when riding into battle. Jan Sobieski led a decisive charge of these cavalrymen into the Ottoman line during the 1683 Siege of Vienna. For the point, name this variant of Polish shock cavalry that became a common light cavalry unit in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Answer: Hussars (

3818. This empire came into conflict with the New Kingdom of Egypt after the death of Prince Zannanza. This empire suffered a major defeat by the Assyrian empire at the Battle of Nihriya, and this empire ended after invasions by the Kaskas, Phrygians, and Bryges. The city of Hattusa was the capital of, for the point, what empire in modern-day Turkey that lost to Ramses the Great in the Battle of Kadesh?
Answer: Hittite Empire (or Hittites

3819. This country was invaded by France in the Pastry War. The Archduke Maximilian attempted to proclaim himself emperor of this country. The leader of this country's resistance during one war was Benito Juárez, and Antonio López lost the northern half of this country's territory. For the point, name this country that lost California to the U.S., and lost the Texas Revolution under Santa Anna.
Answer: Mexico (

3820. Polynesian chicken bones at the El Aranal site have been used as evidence that these people were visited by Trans-Pacific travelers from Tonga. Conquistador Pedro de Valdivia's prolonged 16th century campaign to conquer these people during the Arauco [[ah-RAO-koh]] War ended in his death. For the point, name this indigenous people group of Chile and Argentina who remained nominally independent until the 19th century.
Answer: Mapuche [[mah-POO-cheh]] (

3821. This scientist worked at Peenemünde [[pay-neh-MYOON-deh]] as a young man and told the U.S. government that he had joined the SS because it was the only way he could continue his research. This man came to the U.S. as part of Operation Paperclip and spent twenty years in Huntsville, Alabama where he led the Redstone Arsenal. For the point, name this German director of the Marshall Space Flight Center who led the development of the Saturn V [[FIVE]] rocket.
Answer: Wernher von Braun (or Wernher Magnus Maximilian Freiherr von Braun)

3822. The worst maritime disaster in history occurred in this body of water when the Wilhelm Gustloff sunk, killing around 9,000 people. The Cap Arcona sunk in this sea while full of concentration camp prisoners. The Battle of the Sound took place on this sea whose southern shore was home to the Teutonic Knights. The Swedish Empire once controlled much of, for the point, what Scandinavian sea that is connected to the Atlantic Ocean via the Øresund?
Answer: Baltic Sea

3823. During this politician’s reelection campaign, the phrase “guns, goons, and gold” was used by the media to describe his corrupt tactics. Corazon Aquino succeeded this person as president, ending a 20-year administration hallmarked by stealing upward of ten billion dollars from his nation alongside his wife, Imelda. For the point, name this authoritarian tenth president of the Philippines.
Answer: Ferdinand Marcos (or Ferdinand Emmanuel Edralin Marcos Sr.)

3824. After failing to capture Masyaf, this ruler allied with Sinān and his Assassins. This ruler agreed not to fire upon a tower where a marriage was taking place in the Siege of Kerak. This ruler undermined the Fatimid Caliphate after succeeding his uncle, Shirkuh. This ruler had Raynald of Chatillon executed after winning the Battle of Hattin. For the point, name this founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and opponent of Richard the Lionheart in the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (or Al-Nasir Salah al-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub; or Salah ad-Din)

3825. This industrial site on the Macondo Prospect suffered a 2010 explosion that claimed eleven lives and injured seventeen others. An explosion on this object resulted in the spilling of 200 million gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico. For the point, name this BP semi- submersible offshore drilling rig south of Louisiana, the destruction of which created the greatest marine oil spill in history.
Answer: Deepwater Horizon

3826. Following the death of this organization's leader, Sextus Afranius Burris, it split into two factions which supported or opposed Piso's conspiracy. Previous leaders of this organization included Sejanus [[seh-JAY-nuhs]], who rivaled Emperor Tiberius for power. This organization originally protected important judges and generals who ranked just below consuls. For the point, name this group that evolved into bodyguards and kingmakers for the Roman emperor.
Answer: Praetorian Guard (or Cohortes Praetoriae)

3827. This person’s body may have been discovered by Zhang Junyan and Wang Hungbao, but Wang died in an avalanche before giving a precise location. This person was last seen during a 1924 expedition, as he and Andrew Irvine were 245 meters from reaching one summit. Edmund Hillary called this person the “initial pioneer of the whole idea of climbing [a certain mountain]." For the point, what mountaineer took part in the first three British expeditions to Mount Everest?
Answer: George Mallory (or George Herbert Leigh Mallory)

3828. This person led the rescue of 37 children from a bombed psychiatric hospital during the Siege of Beirut. A prominent critic of this person was Christopher Hitchens, who called her “a fanatic, a fundamentalist, and a fraud” after she was beatified by John Paul II in 2003. The winner of the 1979 Nobel Peace Prize, for the point, what Roman Catholic nun was the founder of the Order of the Missionaries of Charity?
Answer: Mother Teresa (or Anjezë Gonxhe Bonaxhiu; or Mother Mary Teresa Bojaxhiu; or Saint Teresa of Calcutta)

3829. Aboard his ship La Loba, Marquess Álvaro de Bazán [[AHL-vah-roh deh bah-ZAHN]] commanded the reserve fleet in this battle, saving the right wing under Andrea Doria from breaking. During this battle, Ali Pasha was killed and had his head presented to Don John, the illegitimate son of Charles V. The use of the heavier galleasses by the Venetian-led Holy League led to, for the point, what 1571 naval victory by allied Christian forces over the Ottoman Empire?
Answer: Battle of Lepanto

3830. This group was led by Brendan Burns during an ambush that killed 50 soldiers at Narrow Water Castle. Anthony Berry was among the victims of the Brighton hotel bombing that was executed by this group during a failed attempt to assassinate Margaret Thatcher. Responsible for the assassination of Lord Mountbatten in 1979, for the point, what organization’s goal was to drive out the British presence from Northern Ireland?
Answer: IRA (or Irish Republican Army; or Provisional Irish Republican Army

3831. Friedrich Engels called one of this man’s ideas “the crudest, most barbarous theory that ever existed.” The Census Act of 1800 was passed two years after the publication of this man’s most noted book, in which he claimed agricultural production would not keep up with another metric. For the point, what 18th and 19th century economist predicted catastrophic population growth in his book, An Essay on the Principle of Population?
Answer: Thomas Malthus (Thomas Robert Malthus

3832. Emperor Kanmu moved his capital from Nara to the Daidairi Palace in this city, beginning the Heian Period. The Battle of Toba-Fushimi occurred in a field between this city and Osaka. Following the Battle of Sekigahara, Shogun Tokugawa moved his capital from this city to Edo. For the point, name this cultural capital of Japan, replaced as the seat of government in 1603 by Tokyo.
Answer: Kyoto (

3833. Along with Charles Drummond Ellis and Ernest Rutherford, this scientist co-authored Radiations from Radioactive Substances. This scientist wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report and led the British team on the Manhattan Project. The experiment in which alpha particles produced no charge when passing through beryllium foil and paraffin wax was conducted by, for the point, what physicist who discovered the neutron?
Answer: James Chadwick

3834. At the age of 60, this nation's vice president, Ronnie Brunswijk [[BROONS-wike]], put himself in during a CONCACAF [[KON-kah-kaff]] soccer match against the club C.D. Olimpia. That politician serves under a president of Indian descent, Chan Santokhi, who heads the Progressive Reform Party. The Treaty of Breda between the British and United Provinces traded sovereignty over New York for this modern South American nation. Brutal dictator Dési Bouterse [[BAO-ter-suh]] ruled, for the point, what former colony of the Netherlands in South America?
Answer: Republic of Suriname (or Republiek Suriname)

3835. In this battle, the namesake of an American brand of scotch, Johnnie Walker, earned the first convoy victory while captaining the HMS Audacity. The disorganization of the Allied resistance led to the "Second Happy Time" during this naval battle in which the Regia Marina and the Kriegsmarine operated largely unimpeded. The longest continuous battle of World War Two was, for the point, which naval campaign named for a major ocean?
Answer: Battle of the Atlantic

3836. "Bandits led by monks" were blamed for a defeat in this country at Bailén, which Chilean soldiers referenced at Maipú [[mah-ee-POO]]. A Supreme Central and Governing Junta ruled this country during its occupation. This country was briefly ruled by Napoleon's brother, Joseph Bonaparte. A king of this country abdicated at Bayonne after incidents at Aranjuez [[ah-RAHN-hwez]] and El Escorial [[eh-skohr-ree-AHL]]. For the point, name this country where most of the Peninsular War was fought.
Answer: Kingdom of Spain (or Reino de España)

3837. Congress passed the Maypenny Agreement and the “Sell or Starve” Act less than a year after this battle. Despite assisting a battalion led by Marcus Reno, Frederick William Benteen received criticism after this battle for failing to join a lieutenant colonel in a surprise attack. Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull defeated the 7th Calvary Regiment in, for the point, what 1876 battle that was a part of the Great Sioux War, known as “Custer’s Last Stand”?
Answer: Battle of the Little Bighorn (or Battle of the Greasy Grass

3838. Following this treaty, power was placed in the hands of the volksdeutsche [[VOLKS- doytch-eh]] elite in the newly created United Baltic Duchy and Kingdom of Lithuania. This 1918 treaty, which is named for a Belorussian city, was invalidated by the Treaty of Versailles. The newly-formed Soviet Union negotiated with the Central Powers, for the point, what treaty that allowed Russia to exit World War One?
Answer: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk

3839. This composer wrote an overture for a three-day festival in the presence of Edward VII [[the Seventh]] and Queen Alexandra titled In the South. For a memorial concert following the sinking of the Titanic, this composer conducted one of his own pieces that depicts his wife, Alice. This composer's Cello Concerto in E Minor was revived following a recording by Jacqueline du Pré. Composers still try to find the solution to a mysterious theme in, for the point, what English composer's Enigma Variations?
Answer: Edward William Elgar

3840. This former country's monarch was chosen by seven Prince-Electors, including three archbishops and the King of Bohemia. Austria influenced this loose collection of states under the Hapsburgs, whose control was weakened after the Peace of Westphalia. The Thirty Years' War was centered in, for the point, what empire that was last led by Francis II and first led by Charlemagne?
Answer: Holy Roman Empire (

3841. After this structure was built, its commissioner was put under house arrest by his son, Aurangzeb, until his death in 1666. A controversy was raised in 2017 when this building was excluded from tourism materials produced in Uttar Pradesh as officials deemed this building's Mughal builders were "traitors." Built as a memorial for his wife, Mumtaz, for the point, what 17th century mausoleum was commissioned by Emperor Shah Jahan in Agra, India?
Answer: Taj Mahal

3842. A 15th-century text partially titled for these people by Christine de Pizan sings the praises of exemplary members such as Zenobia and Semiramis [[seh-mee-RAH-miss]]. Albertus Magnus wrote a particularly inept and misleading treatise titled On the Secrets of [these people], perhaps inspired by his vow to celibacy. For the point, name this group of people who held medieval occupations like alewives and nuns.
Answer: Women (

3843. This designer funded the demolition of older neighborhoods in the Île de la Cité [[eel- duh-lah-see-TEH]] in favor of buildings like the Tribunal of Commerce. As Prefect of the Seine [[SEHN]], this man introduced advertising columns known as Colonne Morris, and he created the Place de l'Étoile [[leh-TWAHL]], a road junction around the Arc d' Triomphe. For the point, name this Frenchman of German descent who undertook the urban renewal of Paris during the the reign of Napoleon III.
Answer: Baron Haussmann (or Georges-Eugène Haussmann)

3844. The protagonist Mugo becomes a hero of this movement after undertaking a hunger strike in a detention center in the novel A Grain of Wheat by native son Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o [[neh-GOO-gee wah-tee-AHN-goh]]. Members of this Kikuyu-dominated political movement were targeted in the Hola massacre after being clubbed to death by British guards. Operation Anvil depopulated Nairobi of, for the point, what political faction which vied for Kenyan independence?
Answer: Mau Mau movement (or Mau Mau Rebellion

3845. This man, who authored the pamphlet "King Leopold's Soliloquy" about the Congo Free State, served as vice-president of the American Anti-Imperialist League. In a novel, this author wrote about a boy who encounters the Duke and the Dauphin [[doh-FAHN]] while traveling down the Mississippi with an enslaved man named Jim. Southern antebellum society inspired, for the point, what author to write The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn?
Answer: Mark Twain (

3846. The first meeting of the Hellenic League was held at this city, which sometimes gives the league its name. The King's Peace ended a war named for this city that broke out shortly after the Peloponnesian War and pitted Sparta against a Greek-Persian alliance. Tyrants such as Periander of the Cypselid dynasty ruled, for the point, what Greek city that hosted the Isthmian Games?
Answer: Corinth (or Kórinthos

3847. With assistance from the Rohilla, the Pashtun Durrani Empire halted this state's expansion during the Third Battle of Panipat. A refusal to accept the results of the Battle of Wadagon led to this Hindu empire's first war with the British East India company. The Peshwa ruled, for the point, what Confederacy which eclipsed the Mughals in power on the Indian subcontinent in the 18th century?
Answer: Maratha Confederacy (or Maratha Empire)

3848. Muralist David Alfaro Siqueiros [[see-KEH-rohss]] made an attempt at this action with NKVD agent Joseph Grigulevich, resulting in the target's nephew, Esteban, being shot in the foot. A Spanish-born agent successfully committed this action, for which he was awarded the Order of Lenin by Leonid Brezhnev [[BRESH-nehf]]. Ramón Mercader [[rah-MOHN mehr- KAH-dehr]] used an ice-axe to commit, for the point, what 1940 hit-job on a rival of Joseph Stalin in Mexico?
Answer: Assassination of Leon Trotsky (

3849. Two answers required. The de-escalation of an arms race between these two countries was a goal of the Pacts of May. During the Baltimore Crisis, a minister in one of these countries offered the U.S. access to a base in Salta in order to attack the other. During the Snipe incident, the navy of one of these countries attacked the other's lighthouse in the Beagle Channel. For the point, name these two countries which fought over colonization of Patagonia.
Answer: Argentina and Chile (

3850. The discreteness with which one event was undertaken has cast doubt on the claim that this quote was actually said, though its speaker otherwise notified groups about the presence of “Regulars.” This quote is notably omitted from a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow set during the event in which it was allegedly repeated. Attributed to a silversmith, for the point, what was this phrase legendarily yelled out during the midnight ride of Paul Revere?
Answer: "The British are Coming!"

3851. This war's Treaty of London gave back the region of Venetia and Frulia to the Kingdom of Italy. One side's deployment of infantry wielding needle guns allowed Helmuth von Moltke's forces to outgun their opponent in this war's Battle of Königgrätz [[KEHR-nih- grahts]]. A dispute over Schleswig-Holstein led to, for the point, what war between the North German Confederation and the Habsburg monarchy?
Answer: Austro-Prussian War (

3852. This country celebrates the Anniversary of the No, which commemorates this country’s rejection of an ultimatum and subsequent entry into World War Two. This country was invaded in Operation Marita after its forces liberated the city of Korçë [[KART-shuh]] and the region of Epirus [[ih-"PIE"-russ]]. Benito Mussolini launched a failed invasion of this country, which was led by Ioannis Metaxas [[yoh-AH-niss meh-TUK-sass]]. For the point, in which European nation did German troops raise a Nazi flag on the Acropolis?
Answer: Greece (or Hellenic Republic; or Elliniki Dimokratia; or Ellas; or Ellada

3853. The Minister for the Environment of this nation was taken to court by a group of teenagers and a nun to halt the expansion of the Vickery coal mine. Alex Hawke rejected an athlete’s visa to this country because he was “a talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment.” Novak Djokovic [[JOH-koh-vitch]] was deported from, for the point, what country led by Prime Minister Scott Morrison?
Answer: Commonwealth of Australia

3854. This man's tombstone, which reads "Ungrateful fatherland, you will not even have my bones," was erected due to bitterness at his exile from Rome after being falsely charged with taking bribes from Antiochus the Great. The death of this man's father at Upper Baetis by Hasdrubal prompted this general to undertake the Hispania campaign of the Second Punic War. For the point, name this victor at Zama who was given the honorific Africanus.
Answer: Scipio Africanus the Elder (or Scipio Africanus Major

3855. In the film Spencer, Princess Diana envisions the ghost of this person in place of Queen Elizabeth II during a Christmas dinner at Sandringham. This person’s demise was depicted in a 2008 film after Jane Parker claims that this woman was having an incestuous affair with her brother, George. For the point, who was the second wife of King Henry VIII [[the Eighth]], ultimately beheaded on charges of adultery and treason?
Answer: Anne Boleyn (

3856. This organization successfully orchestrated the death of Ali Hassan Salameh, the Red Prince, during the larger "Operation Wrath of God." This agency undertook an extrajudicial operation which captured and led to the execution of Adolf Eichmann after he was discovered hiding in Argentina. For the point, name this intelligence agency of the State of Israel.
Answer: Mossad

3857. This man was said to have saved three innocent men from execution by pushing the executioner’s sword to the ground. One tradition observed in the Netherlands during this man’s “Feast” involves children putting carrots and hay in their shoes as gifts for his horse. For the point, what Bishop of Myra is the patron saint of children and the inspiration for Santa Claus?
Answer: Saint Nicholas of Myra (or Nicholas of Bari; or Sint-Nicolaas; or Sankt Nikolaus

3858. During this event, Prime Minister of Canada Joe Clark allowed an Order of Council letting Canadian passports be issued to some American citizens. Operation Eagle Claw was a failed attempt to end this event, which was perpetrated by a Muslim student organization under the influence of Ayatollah Khomeini. The Election of Ronald Reagan influenced the end of, for the point, which "Crisis" caused by a takeover of the U.S. embassy in Tehran?
Answer: Iran Hostage Crisis

3859. Some of the clauses in a “Protocol” ending this conflict included an apology to the German emperor for Baron von Ketteler’s assassination and the destruction of the Taku Forts. This conflict was formally ordered by Empress Dowager Cixi [[SEE-SHEE]]. Won by the Eight- Nation Alliance, for the point, what anti-foreign “Rebellion” in China was named after the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists?
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (or Boxer Uprising; or Boxer Resurrection; or Yihetuan Movement)

3860. This city hosted the Red Bull Stratos in which Austrian skydiver Felix Baumgartner flew 24 miles into the stratosphere. A report by the United States Air Force explained that debris found in this city was a Project Mogul balloon that crashed in the desert. With a little green man and a flying saucer depicted on its seal, for the point, what city in New Mexico supposedly experienced UFO sightings in 1947?
Answer: Roswell, New Mexico

3861. Most of Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur [[dahr-TUHR]] was likely written at one of these locations. The protagonist's mother "pleads the belly" while at one of these places in Moll Flanders. A resident of one of these places wrote a letter to the son of the Marquess of Queensbury and a poem that notes, "Each man kills the thing he loves." For the point, name these locations about which Oscar Wilde wrote while facing punishment for homosexuality.
Answer: Prisons (

3862. Much of this nation's territory was gained from the Tati Concessions by Matabele king Lobengula [[loh-BEN-goo-lah]] for arms and gold bullion. Stellaland was a failed Boer state established in this modern-day nation, which was supported by the Transvaal Republic until the Warren Expedition captured Mafeking [[mah-feh-KING]]. Most of Namibia's Herero people fled to this modern nation after facing systemic genocide by German occupiers. Known as Bechuanaland under British colonial rule, for the point, what is this African nation governed from Gabarone?
Answer: Republic of Botswana (or Lefatshe la Botswana

3863. A biblical beggar affected by this disease inspired the term "Lazaretto," a medieval location used to isolate potential plague victims. King Kamehameha V created a "colony" for people effected by this disease on the island of Kalaupapa, which is where Saint Damien of Molokai served afflicted people. Wild armadillos can spread, for the point, what historically persecuted disease which causes skin lesions?
Answer: Leprosy (

3864. The aria "Dovunque [[doh-VOON-keh]] al Mondo" features motifs of the "Star- Spangled Banner" in this opera. That motif in this opera accompanies a character who marries Kate, prompting the protagonist to give her son an American flag and kill herself. For the point, name this Giacomo Puccini opera about a woman who marries American Lieutenant B.F. Pinkerton, Cio-Cio [[CHO-CHO]] San.
Answer: Madama Butterfly (

3865. Rear Admiral William Caperton's threats to bombard this city led the government of Desiderio Arias to flee, leading to an eight-year U.S. occupation. U.S. agents supported Joaquín Balaguer [[wah-KEEN bah-lah-GEHR]] loyalists who fought for control of this city after the death of a leader who committed the Parsley Massacre. For the point, name this city from which Rafael Trujillo [[troo-HEE-yoh]] ruled the Dominican Republic.
Answer: Santo Domingo

3866. While facing a paternity suit against Joan Berry, this man was charged by the FBI under J. Edgar Hoover with violating the Mann Act. After over twenty years of exile, this person returned to the United States in 1972 to accept an Honorary Oscar. For the point, what British silent film actor is best known for films such as City Lights, Modern Times, and The Great Dictator?
Answer: Charlie Chaplin (or Charles Spencer Chaplin Jr.)

3867. Derek Freeman called this person a “fateful hoaxing” for being duped by indigenous interviewees. This person argued that adolescents in Western cultures faced “storm and stress” compared to those living on the island of Ta’ū. For the point, what cultural anthropologist who advocated for a broadening of sexual attitudes wrote Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies and Coming of Age in Samoa?
Answer: Margaret Mead

3868. This man outfitted a luxury train that ran from his capital to the coastal town of Bar. The Mitrokhin Archive outed an attempt to kill this man by KGB agents who were armed with a powdered form of the Plague. The Vatican excommunicated this man for executing former Ustaše [[oo-stah-SHAY]] members. This man dogmatically split from Stalin after the USSR failed to back his acquisition of Trieste. For the point, name this Cold War dictator of Yugoslavia.
Answer: Josef Broz Tito (

3869. This person said he “acted in good faith” after the Chilcot Report exposed his initial downplay of the war in Iraq. This man and Bertie Ahern signed the Good Friday Agreement less than a year into his premiership. Described as being George W. Bush’s “poodle”, for the point, what Labour Party leader was prime minister of the United Kingdom from 1997 to 2007?
Answer: Tony Blair (or Anthony Charles Lynton Blair)

3870. A song created by Theocritus [[thee-AH-krih-tuss]] as a wedding commemoration includes the line, “Reverence me. I am [this woman’s] tree.” This woman was believed to have been buried in the town of Therapne, in which she shares a shrine with Menelaus. For the point, what woman in Greek mythology was known as “the face that launched a thousand ships,” whose elopement with Paris caused the Trojan War?
Answer: Helen of Troy

3871. A person was charged in these events after a woman named Mercy Lewis claimed she couldn’t unclasp her hands. These events were recorded in a book titled Wonders of the Invisible World by Cotton Mather. Mary Eastey, Rebecca Nurse, and John Proctor were some of the victims of, for the point, what 1692 “trials” that caused a mass hysteria in Massachusetts over the presence of supernatural beings?
Answer: Salem witch trials (

3872. Beginning in the Shari Naw neighborhood of this city, the Saur Revolution overthrew Mohammed Daoud Khan and killed him after he refused to pledge allegiance to the Soviet aligned Communist Party. A mid-1990s siege of this city culminated in the hanging of former president Mohammad Najibullah outside the Arg Presidential Palace. The Taliban retook, for the point, what capital of Afghanistan in 2021?
Answer: Kabul

3873. The settlement of over 3,200 Europeans in what became this municipality was a catalyst for Father Le Loutre’s War. Lawrencetown is within this municipality, whose Richmond (+) District was heavily damaged in a 1917 event that killed over 1,600 people. That event involved a Belgian Relief steamship known as the SS Imo and the French cargo ship Mont (*) Blanc. For the point, a major maritime “Explosion” affected what Canadian municipality that is the capital of Nova Scotia?
Answer: Halifax (

3874. The last king of this people, Khamudi, was forced to flee to the Negev Desert and died after his fortress in Sharuhen fell to the royal Apepi. These foreigners, who moved their capital to (+) Avaris from Thebes, likely popularized the use of the horse and chariot as recorded by the scribes of Ahmose (*) I. For the point, name these Semitic people who ruled as the Egyptian Fifteenth Dynasty for a century.
Answer: Hyksos (or Hekau Khasut; do not

3875. French astronomer Jacques du Chevreul [[doo-shev-RUHL]] rejected this man’s claim that Mars was located under the sun. This astronomer wrote the poem Elegy to Dania after being exiled by (+) Christian IV. Johannes Kepler used observational data collected by this astronomer in the Rudolphine Tables. Known for his metallic (*) nose, for the point, what Danish astronomer is also known for his accurate and comprehensive observations made without the use of a telescope?
Answer: Tycho Brahe (or Tyge Ottesen Brahe)

3876. This man willingly disbanded loyal legions in 79 B.C. to retire to the countryside in Puteoli. This enemy of the (+) populares was vital in defeating the Numidian king, Jugurtha, but his superior, Gaius (*) Marius, controversially took credit for the victory. For the point, name this two-time consul and dictator of Rome whose violent purges paved the way for Julius Caesar's rise to power during the Late Republic.
Answer: Sulla (or Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix)

3877. In a novel from this country, theorists speculate that the Soviet Union is represented by a vast ocean of gel that covers the planet of Solaris. Olga (+) Tokarczuk [[toh-KAHR-chuk]] is from this country, as is the author of a novel about Lygia and Marcus Vinicius subtitled "A Narrative of the Time (*) of Nero." For the point, name this home country of Stanisław Lem and Quo Vadis author Henryk Sienkiewicz [[SYEN-keyh-vits]].
Answer: Republic of Poland (or Rzeczpospolita Polska)

3878. This fruit of Indo-Malayan origin names an Indian Ocean island group controlled by Australia which is sometimes named for Captain William Keeling. The crew (+) of patrol torpedo boat PT-109, led by John F. Kennedy, built dugout canoes of this fruit's husk while stranded on Olasana Island. A type of "Milk" and (*) "Oil" can be derived from, for the point, what tropical fruit first described to Europeans by Antonio Pigafetta?
Answer: Coconut (

3879. This man, who once governed the Austrian Netherlands, was wounded in the neck during the bloody Battle of Malplaquet [[mahl-plah-KEH]]. After this man's primary (+) ally was sacked by Queen Anne, this general was outmaneuvered by Marshal Villars [[vee-YAHR]] in the Low Countries during ongoing negotiations at (*) Utrecht. For the point, name this French-born Austrian general, the primary lieutenant of the Duke of Marlborough throughout the War of the Spanish Succession.
Answer: Prince Eugene [[yoo-ZHEN]] of Savoy (or Prince Eugene Francis of Savoy– Carignano

3880. This member of the Order of Santiago was noted for his cruelty, including the 1502 burning and looting of a ship full of Muslim pilgrims traveling to Mecca. This (+) man's discoveries are celebrated in Luis de Camões's [[kah-MOYSH-es]] The Lusiads, and this man died of Malaria off the Malabar (*) Coast. For the point, name this Portuguese explorer, the first European to make a sea voyage to India.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

3881. This people migrated to Persia after their leader had a falling out with Yabghu [[YAHB-goo]] and subsequently separated from the (+) Oghuz. In Persia, this group of people defeated the Ghaznavid [[gahs-NAH-vid]] army at both the Battle of Nasa plains and the Battle of (*) Dandanaqan [[dan-DAN-uh-kun]]. For the point, name this Sunni Muslim dynasty that established a namesake empire under Toghrul I, as well as the Sultanate of Rum, both of which were targets of the First Crusade.
Answer: Seljuk dynasty (or Seljuks; or Seljukids

3882. Immediately following this battle, Earl Morcar of Northumbria threw his support behind Edgar the Aethling, who was elected king by the Witenagemot. Edgar (+) succeeded one man who was legendarily killed by an arrow to the eye in this battle, which he fought shortly after defeating Harald Hardrada at the Battle of Stamford (*) Bridge. Depicted in the Bayeux [[bah-YOU]] Tapestry, for the point, what is this 1066 battle that decided the crown of England for William the Conqueror?
Answer: Battle of Hastings

3883. This man became the assistant to the discoverer of potassium and sodium after the latter nearly blinded himself with nitrogen trichloride. One of this scientist’s (+) experiments involved compressing coal gas while another of this man's experiments utilizes a paper cylinder wrapped in wire that was connected to a (*) galvanometer. For the point, what chemist and physicist discovered benzene and electromagnetic induction?
Answer: Michael Faraday

3884. Soviet engineers accidentally caused the Darvaza gas crater in this nation, a continuous burning methane site in the Karakorum Desert. The Rukhnama, (+) or "Book of Soul," was a propaganda work written by a former head of this state, Saparmurat Niyazov. A personality cult was built by (*) Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow [[gur-bahn-GOO-lee behr-"MUHAMMAD"-ohv]], the former president of, for the point, which Central Asian nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkmenistan

3885. Senator and rebel leader Prince Y. Johnson captured a man in this position and videotaped himself drinking beer while that man in this position had his ears cut off. Former AC Milan (+) footballer George Weah [[WEE-uh]] entered this office in 2018 after defeating the incumbent, the first woman to hold this position, Ellen Johnson (*) Sirleaf. Former Virginia slave Joseph Jenkins Roberts was the first to hold, for the point, what position that resides in the Executive Mansion in Monrovia?
Answer: President of the Republic of Liberia

3886. This politician’s campaign slogan during their first run for congress was “Finally, A Tough Democrat.” This (+) person’s second bid for the Senate resulted in a loss against Chuck Schumer in the 1998 New York (*) Senate election. For the point, what politician was Walter Mondale’s running mate during the 1984 presidential election, the first female vice presidential candidate of a major party?
Answer: Geraldine Ferraro (or Geraldine Anne Ferraro)

3887. A French pioneer of this philosophy, Peter Abelard, wrote the first autobiography in Western Europe, titled History of my Misfortunes. The (+) originator of the ontological argument, Anselm of Canterbury, is considered the father of this school of philosophy. Thomas Aquinas (*) was a practitioner of, for the point, what2022 Asian Championships History Bee Finals medieval school of philosophy that attempted to harmonize Aristotle and Catholic doctrine, the dominant school in Europe from 1100 to 1700?
Answer: Scholasticism (or the Scholastics)

3888. This man allegedly helped cure the ergotism of two noblemen, which led to that disease being referred to as this man’s “fire.” Athanasius (+) of Alexandria wrote a biography of this man, who attempted to hide in a cave to escape a group of demons. This man withdrew to a mountain by the Nile in order to lead an (*) ascetic life. For the point, name this Egyptian "Desert Father" often referred to as the “Father of All Monks.”
Answer: Saint Anthony the Great (or Anthony of Egypt; or Anthony the Abbot; or Anthony of the Desert; or Anthony the Anchorite; or Anthony the Hermit; or Anthony of Thebes

3889. This man’s flight to Diggers Rest was falsely reported as the first aerial flight in Australia. A (+) challenge by the Daily Mirror resulted in this man weeping after taking a full hour to escape from specially made (*) handcuffs. For the point, what Hungarian- American illusionist was famous for his ability to escape from chains, milk cans, and straight jackets?
Answer: Harry Houdini (or Erik Weisz)

3890. This leader, who opened the Whampoa Military Academy, governed under the Three Principles of the People. Following the Xinhai [[SHIN-HYE]] Revolution, this man ceded power to the warlord Yuan (+) Shikai. This leader's death fractured the First United Front and led to the civil war between the Communist Party and the (*) Kuomintang. For the point, name this "Father of the Nation" and first provisional president of the Republic of China.
Answer: Sun Yat-Sen (or Sun Deming

3891. Paul Crowther was convicted of assaulting this man with a milkshake for, he claimed, "spouting bile and racism." This man was challenged to a sword duel by Polish aristocrat John (+) Zylinski due to his comments over Eastern European immigrants. This man nearly died in 2010 after a pro-United Kingdom Independence Party banner was caught in the tailplane of the small aircraft in which he was traveling. The Euroskeptic (*) "Brexit Party" was founded by, for the point, which British right-wing populist politician?
Answer: Nigel Farage [["FAIR"-ahzh]] (or Nigel Paul Farage)

3892. This work was restored by Juan García de Miranda after it was damaged in a fire at the Alcázar. A figure in this painting was misidentified as Maria (+) Theresa when it was inventoried at the Madrid Royal Palace. Viewed from the lenses of Mariana of Austria and Philip (*) IV, for the point, what 1656 painting by Diego Velázquez depicts the Infanta Margarita surrounded by her ladies-in-waiting?
Answer: Las Meninas

3893. This subject of a 2020 bestseller by Larry Tye was associated with a movement which William F. Buckley claimed “men of … stern morality can close ranks" behind. One (+) president claimed that he "will not get into the gutter with [this man]," whose popularity plummeted after he was asked “have you no sense of decency, sir” during a set of (*) hearings. For the point, name this Wisconsin senator and anti-communist who fueled the Second Red Scare.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy

3894. This deity was likely combined with the war god Wepwawet, and this deity helped Isis embalm Osiris in one myth. Priests of this deity conducted the Opening of the (+) Mouth Ceremony which prepared the spirit for the "weighing of the hearts" conducted by this deity, according to the Book of the (*) Dead. For the point, name this Ancient Egyptian jackal-headed god of death whose worship was an integral part of the mummification process.
Answer: Anubis (or Inpu; or Anpu)

3895. This man won a wrestling match after being challenged by King Henry VIII during the negotiation of the Field of the Cloth of (+) Gold. This king, who was known as the "Knight-King," was captured by condiotierro Cesare Hercolani during the Battle of (*) Pavia. For the point, name this 16th century King of France, a member of the House of Valois [[vah-LWAH]].
Answer: Francis I (

3896. During a rap battle, this man tells his opponent, “You died owning slaves. I died setting men free.” In (+) that same episode of Epic Rap Battles of History, George Washington asks this man, “How’d you get beat by a dude named (*) Longshanks?” For the point, what nationalist fought in the First War of Scottish Independence and was played by Mel Gibson in the film Braveheart?
Answer: William Wallace

3897. This composer was exiled prior to the premier of one of his operas after he took part in the May Uprising. It is believed that Felix (+) Mendelssohn and Giacomo Meyerbeer were targets of this composer’s ant-semitic essay Jewishness in Music. Claimed to have been Adolf Hitler’s (*) favorite, for the point, what German composer’s works include Tannhäuser [[TON-hoy-zer]], Lohengrin, and The Ring of the Nibelung?
Answer: Richard Wagner [[VAHG-nuh]] (or Wilhelm Richard Wagner

3898. In 2019, this man's remains were exhumed from the Valle de los Caídos [[VYE- yeh deh los kye-EE-dohss]] and reburied in his wife's mausoleum in Mingorrubio (+) Cemetery. Despite being supported by the Condor Legion in a civil war, this man kept his country neutral during World (*) War Two. In 1969, this man named Prince Juan Carlos as his heir apparent. For the point, name this man who ruled as Generalissimo of Spain between 1936 and 1975.
Answer: Francisco Franco Bahamonde

3899. A trip to Crete inspired the semi-mythical figure Lycurgus [[lye-KUR-guss]] to introduce this system, including the use of a common mess hall and a restriction on (+) bathing. This system, which was often led by more experienced men known as paidonomoi, was chronicled by the Athenian Xenophon, who put his own sons into this program while serving as a mercenary. The youth of (*) Sparta were subjected to, for ten points, what twenty year program of militaristic training?
Answer: Agoge [[ah-GOH-gay]] (or Agōgā)

3900. Operation Paget [[PAH-jet]] was an inquiry established in 2004 to investigate conspiracy theories about this event. Trevor Rees-Jones survived while both Henri (+) Paul and Dodi Fayed [[DOH-dee fye-ED]] died in this event, which was originally blamed on aggressive (*) paparazzi. For the point, what tragic 1997 event involved a royal in a car accident in the Pont de l’Alma tunnel in Paris, France?
Answer: Death of Diana, Princess of Wales (

3901. This battle was codenamed Operation Watch on the Rhine by the German military. The city of (+) Bastogne was a key objective in this battle, during which one commander responded with the word “Nuts” when asked to surrender. One of the objectives of this battle was to capture the port of (*) Antwerp, and this battle took place in the Ardennes Forest. For the point, name this battle, the final major German offensive of World War Two.
Answer: Battle of the Bulge (

3902. The Ninth of September Front opposed an independence movement for this island led by George Grivas known as EOKA [[ee-OH-kah]]. The nationalist (+) Nikos Sampson was installed as the leader of this island after a coup ousted Makarios [[mah- KAH-ree-ohss]] III. That coup was followed by a 1974 invasion of this country codenamed Operation (*) Atilla. For the point, name this island divided between a Turkish northern half and a Greek southern half and governed from Nicosia [[nik-oh-SEE-ah]].
Answer: Cyprus (or Kýpros

3903. Using dark blue woad [[WODE]], the Picts created examples of this art form to commemorate acts of valor. Tā moko is a form of this art sacred to the (+) Māori, which gains its color from the soot of burned white pine mixed with kauri gum. Pope Adrian I banned this art form since he decreed that the body was made in the image of (*) God. For the point, name this art of body modification often using needles and ink.
Answer: Tattoos (

3904. Alan Krueger’s 2007 study found that this activity was less likely to be carried out by those from an impoverished background. Examples of this activity include the Kunduz airlift in 2001, which was “state-sponsored” and led to a practitioner of this activity living in Abbottabad until 2011. For ten points, name this general term for intentional violence committed to achieve a political or ideological goal.
Answer: terrorism (

3905. In 1888, Karl Josef Bayer developed a process for refining the oxide of this element from bauxite; the smelting of this element is then typically done through the electrolytic Hall-Heroult process. This element is the most common metal found in the Earth’s crust and is crucial for aerospace technology. For ten points, name this lightweight metal with atomic number 13 that is used in soda cans.
Answer: aluminum (

3906. In this location, soapstone monoliths depict raptor-like “birds of heaven,” and houses in this site are made of mud bricks called daga. This city is legendarily conflated with the Palace of the Queen of Sheba. Decorative masonry used in a Conical Tower in this city lead to its Shona name meaning “houses of stone,” and parallel walls surrounding this city are known as the Great Enclosure. For ten points, name this “Great” city, built several centuries ago in Masvingo Province in its namesake African country.
Answer: Great Zimbabwe

3907. This country’s government was deposed in 1997 after a series of pyramid schemes that saw its population lose over $1 billion US dollars. This country’s national hero is the nobleman Skanderbeg who both served for and later fought against the Ottoman Empire. This country was led by Enver Hoxha in the Cold War who allied it with Maoist China as opposed to Soviet Russia. For ten points, name this European country that was once led by King Zog from Tirana.
Answer: Albania

3908. This present-day country was the site of the Battle of Ramree Island in February 1945 which may have led to the greatest massacre by crocodiles in history. The Japanese bombed this country’s city of Mandalay in 1942. This country was the home of UN Secretary General U Thant and its former capital was formerly known as Rangoon. For ten points, name this country whose government controversially approved plans for dams on the Irrawaddy River in Southeast Asia.
Answer: Myanmar or Burma

3909. At this location, Ahmad Abdali’s forces defeated Sadashivrao Bhau, though the Durrani Empire opted to retreat regardless. After a victory at Tughlaqabad, Hemu was killed at a battle in this location when Bairam Khan moved to reconquer Delhi. At one battle in this location, one ruler used araba carts to maximize the effect of his artillery against Ibrahim Lodi. For ten points, name this site of a 1526 victory for Babur that marked the beginning of the Mughal dynasty.
Answer: (Battle(s) of) Panipat Page 1

3910. In 2010, this city’s Park Kultury metro stop was suicide-bombed by two women working for Doku Umarov. Special forces were criticized for indiscriminately killing 130 civilians with poison gas while trying to resolve a hostage crisis in a theatre in this city. In 1999, FSB agents were accused of staging false flag apartment bombings upon this capital city in order to justify the Second Chechen War. For ten points, name this capital of the Russian Federation.
Answer: Moscow

3911. A storm in this ocean threw the Apung ship 2 miles inland, where it is now a tourist attraction. This ocean's atoll of Diego Garcia had its populace forcibly removed by the UK and United States in order to build a military base there. The rise of this ocean's sea level was protested by a 2009 underwater cabinet meeting. The lack of an early warning system in this ocean worsened the death toll of a devastating 2004 tsunami in, for the point, what ocean in which Sri Lanka is located?
Answer: Indian Ocean Second Quarter (1) This man replaced his superior, Quintus Caecilius Metellus, as the commander of the expedition against Jugurtha. He decisively defeated the Cimbri and the Teutones while serving as consul, a position that he was elected to seven times. In an effort to minimize the baggage train, this man ordered his soldiers to carry their supplies on his back, earning them the nickname of this man’s mules. For ten points, name this Roman general, the first to recruit soldiers from the poor, one of his many reforms. Gaius Marius BONUS: Marius’s rival late in life was this man, the first general to march on Rome. He instituted proscription to target his political enemies. Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix

3912. This scientist went to work at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions after he was forced to step down from his position at Caltech due to his antiwar positions. This man proposed an incorrect triple helix model for DNA and recommended treating the common cold and cancer with high dosages of Vitamin C. This scientist also introduced orbital hybridization and the electronegativity scale. For ten points, name this two time Nobel laureate.
Answer: Linus Pauling BONUS: Pauling and colleagues determined that a defect in hemoglobin is the cause of this disease. The fact that it makes its victims immune to malaria was first observed in African slaves taken to the Americas. sickle cell anemia

3913. Prior to the rule of this government, its second ruler disobeyed orders and fought the Sanada clan at Ueda Castle [oo-AY-da “castle”]. It created a policy of alternate attendance between the central court and the domains of each provincial lord. Until the Convention of Kanagawa, this government limited trade with China and Europe to the port city of Nagasaki via the sakoku law. Ieyasu founded, for ten points, what final Japanese shogunate that ruled until the Meiji Restoration?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu

3914. This country indicted Tatsuya Kato for his reporting of the aftermath of a 2013 disaster that killed 304 people, including numerous students from Danwon High School. Wikileaks released a 2007 diplomatic cable in which this country’s current president was accused of being under the control of a “Rasputin” like figure. Choi Soon-sil faces charges of influencing Park Geun-Hye, the president of, for ten points, what Asian country where protesters against Park flooded the streets of Seoul?
Answer: South Korea (or Republic of Korea) BONUS: The aforementioned

3915. This leader was beaten despite the actions of the king Prasutagus, who had betrothed his land to Claudius. The Ninth Legion was destroyed by this leader’s forces, along with the allied Trinovantes people. While Suetonius was away campaigning, this leader started a revolt by attacking the colony at Camulodunum. This leader’s defeat at the Battle of Watling Street came after her sack of Londinium. For ten points, name this queen who launched a major revolt in Roman Britain.
Answer: Boudica [boo-duh-kuh] (or Boadicea) BONUS: Boudica and Prasutagus were rulers of this tribe in eastern Britain, near modern Suffolk. Iceni (or Eceni)

3916. Description acceptable. In 2010, Ronnie Lee Gardner opted to undergo this action in accordance with his “Mormon heritage.” Eddie Adams captured a photograph of this action about to be performed against Nguyen Van Lem, a Communist assassin, in 1968 in the streets of Saigon by a police general. When this action is done by a group of people, some may be randomly given blanks to diffuse the personal responsibility. For ten points, name this violent act of punishment often performed by a firing squad.
Answer: shooting the condemned (

3917. This leader ordered the creation of Unit 101, which committed the Qibya massacre as a reprisal attack. In his later career, he became minister of defense after Pinhas Lavon was caught planning false- flag bombing attacks on Egypt. This leader authorized Operation Magic Carpet to relocate thousands of Yemeni and Ethiopian Jews. He merged the Irgun militia into the IDF to fight against the Arab League shortly after his country gained independence in 1948. For ten points, name the first prime minister of Israel.
Answer: David Ben-Gurion BONUS: After his career in politics, Ben-Gurion retired to one of these Israeli collectivist farms, many of which industrialized over the 20th century. A few hundred of these communities exist in Israel today. kibbutzim

3918. Claims that this man had been targeted by the Bulgarian secret service were investigated by the Mitrokhin Commission. During a visit to the Philippines, this man was targeted in the failed Bojinka plot; fourteen years earlier, this man survived an attack from a “Grey Wolf,” Mehmet Ali Agca [ah-jah]. This man, who encouraged the Solidarity movement in a 1979 speech in Warsaw, succeeded a similarly named pontiff who lasted only thirty three days in office. For ten points, name this Polish pope who was canonized in 2014
Answer: Pope Saint John Paul II (or Karol Jozef Wojtyla [voy-twah]

3919. Kingdom that Alexander the Great ruled, to the north of classical Greece.
Answer: Kingdom of Macedon (

3920. Tutor of Alexander, a student of Plato.
Answer: Aristotle

3921. Empire to the east that Alexander the Great conquered. It used a system of local government called satrapies.
Answer: Persian Empire (or Achaemenid Empire)

3922. Rival leader of that empire, who was killed after Alexander won at Gaugamela.
Answer: Darius III (

3923. His horse, whom he later named a city after.
Answer: Bucephalus

3924. Decisive victory for Alexander in 333 fought near the northeastern tip of the Mediterranean.
Answer: Battle of Issus Page 4

3925. Color used to describe the Bubonic Plague’s “death.”
Answer: black (

3926. Flea-laden rodents that spread the plague by stowing away in ships.
Answer: rats

3927. People that helped spread the disease while conquering the largest contiguous empire in history.
Answer: Mongols

3928. Political system between lords and vassals that declined in part due to the plague.
Answer: feudalism (or manorialism

3929. Collection of tales by Boccaccio told by Florentines fleeing the plague
Answer: Decameron

3930. Within two, the year in which the plague is though to have entered Europe in the Crimea
Answer: 1347 (

3931. 1993: Former South African prisoner who was a co-recipient with F.W. de Klerk.
Answer: Nelson Mandela

3932. 2009: President who won, according to cynics, mostly for not being George W. Bush
Answer: Barack Obama

3933. 2014: Pakistani teenage activist for education of girls.
Answer: Malala Yousafzai (

3934. 2001: Global diplomatic organization then led by co-winner, Secretary General Kofi Annan.
Answer: United Nations

3935. 1991: Burmese democratic activist, under house arrest at the time of the award.
Answer: Aung San Suu Kyi [chee]

3936. 2015: Country where a National Dialogue Quartet worked for democratic change after the Jasmine Revolution.
Answer: Tunisia (

3937. This leader’s Anti-Radical Decree prevented communists from taking jobs as teachers. In the midst of negotiating the boundaries of the Oder-Neisse line with Poland, this leader performed the kniefall [”kneefall”] in front of a (+) monument to victims of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. This Social Democrat was forced to resign when his aide, Gunter Guillaume [ghee- ohm], was revealed to be a (*) Stasi agent from a neighboring country. For ten points, name this West German chancellor who won the 1971 Nobel Peace Prize for his practice of ostpolitik.
Answer: Willy Brandt Page 5

3938. This man hosted a religious debate at his castle of Azuchi, which he built to defend the capital. He used arquebuses against a cavalry attack at the Battle of Nagashino, and he defeated an Imagawa attack into his territory at the Battle of (+) Okehazama. After the treachery of Akechi Mitsuhide, this man was forced to commit suicide in the Incident of Honnoji. (*) Toyotomi Hideyoshi succeeded, for ten points, which daimyo who overthrew the Ashikaga Shogunate, the first “Great Unifier” of Japan during the Sengoku period?
Answer: Oda Nobunaga

3939. In 1853, Richard Francis Burton visited this city, having spent months preparing his disguise. This city was recaptured from the Ottomans in July 1916, after which T.E. Lawrence was sent to assist the new Kingdom of Hejaz continue the (+) Arab Revolt. Wahhabist rule has threatened historic structures in this city; for example, a Hilton hotel was built over the house of (*) Abu Bakr, the first Islamic caliph. For ten points, name this Saudi Arabian city, home of the Masjid al- Haram and holiest city of Islam.
Answer: Mecca

3940. In this battle, the Atago sank in Palawan Passage after a torpedo attack by the USS Darter. During this battle, the phrase “the world wonders” was added to an encrypted message to throw off codebreakers, but accidentally delivered to the American admiral; as a result of that and other miscommunications, Thomas (+) Kinkaid’s Seventh Fleet asked, but did not receive, help from Willam Halsey’s Third Fleet during this battle. The first series of organized (*) kamikaze attacks took place during, for ten points, what October 1944 battle fought in the waters off Luzon, the largest naval battle of World War II?
Answer: Battle of Leyte Gulf

3941. The court of this king resolved a disputation in which Nicholas Donin pressed charges of blasphemy against the Talmud. This king allowed Henry III to keep his conquests in Aquitaine despite defeating him at (+) Taillebourg. During a campaign, this king was captured by the troops of Baibars and Qutuz. Damietta was given to the Mamluks in exchange for the release of this king following the Battle of Al-Mansurah. This king died of dysentery in modern-day (*) Tunisia while leading the Eighth Crusade. For ten points, name this only French monarch to be canonized.
Answer: Louis IX (or Saint Louis

3942. This man claimed that using body doubles as a security measure was “movie magic, not reality” in a conversation with George Piro. Piro’s interrogation of this man, described as “High Value Detainee #1,” found he held (+) no links with al-Qaeda or interest in creating an Islamic state. Nine months after a “shock and awe” campaign began, this man was discovered in a (*) “spider hole” on a farm near Tikrit in December 2003. For ten points, name this Ba’ath Party leader who was hanged in December 2006 for crimes against humanity carried out as President of Iraq.
Answer: Saddam Hussein (

3943. The cameraman Max Stahl helped expose troops from this country who had fired on protesters at a cemetery in Santa Cruz. This country initiated the Konfrontasi standoff to prevent an amalgamation of neighboring states to its west. (+) Mohammed Hatta helped this country secure its independence from the Netherlands in 1949. The principles of pancasila inspired this country’s (*) “New Order,” which replaced the idea of “Guided Democracy.” For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country whose president Suharto invaded East Timor. Page 6IHBB Asian Championships Bowl 2016-2017 Bowl Round 8
Answer: Indonesia

3944. This party requires its candidates to not have any criminal records; its founder was found guilty of manslaughter in 1980, so he cannot run for office. To encourage direct democracy, this party launched the “Rousseau” (+) web app for discussion and votes on policy. This party led the “No” movement against a 2016 constitutional referendum that would have reformed the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, leading to Matteo Renzi’s resignation. Virginia Raggi, the mayor of Rome, is a member of, (*) for ten points, what Italian populist party that was founded by former comedian Beppe Grillo?
Answer: Five Star Movement (or Movimento 5 Stelle or M5S)

3945. A shipment of arms to this group aboard the Eksund was intercepted by the French and discovered to have been sent by Muammar Gaddafi. Bobby Sands died in a hunger strike protesting the lack of prison rights afforded to members of this group, which began to disarm after Sinn Fein [shin fayn] signed the Good Friday Accords with Tony Blair. For ten points, name this paramilitary group that during The Troubles fought for a united Ireland.
Answer: Provisional Irish Republican Army (or PIRA)

3946. This first editor of the journal Modern Times popularized the phrase “existence precedes essence” in his Existentialism and Humanism, which rejected deterministic excuses for behavior. This philosopher popularized the idea that there are “two modes of consciousness,” and that “bad faith” forces human beings to adopt false values, in his Being and Nothingness. For ten points, name this French post-war philosopher and Nobel Laureate who was married to Simone de Beauvoir.
Answer: Jean-Paul Sartre

3947. A member of this family was targeted by the Soviet-backed Yanan Faction in the “Second Arduous March.” A member of this family instituted the “Juche” [joo-chay] policy of self-reliance and took the title of “Eternal President,” while another member of this family allegedly ordered a hacking of Sony after he was unfavorably depicted in The Interview. Il-Sung, Jong-Il, and Jong-Un are members of, for ten points, what family that rules North Korea?
Answer: Kim family

3948. Major cities in this country were seized by Yahya Khan’s troops during Operation Searchlight in an attempt to prevent the Awami League from taking power. In 1971, George Harrison organized the world’s first benefit concert to support this country, which was suffering a genocide during its war of independence from Pakistan. For ten points, name this country, now an independent country with capital Dhaka.
Answer: Bangladesh (

3949. This treaty forced North American tribes formerly loyal to France to open trade with all nations. Britain increased its hold on the slave market when it was given the asiento in this treaty. Philip, duke of Anjou, renounced his claim to the French throne as a result of, for ten points, what treaty that ended the War of the Spanish Succession?
Answer: Treaty of Utrecht

3950. After the Battle of Las Guasimas, the doctor Leonard Wood ceased to be the leader of this group, which presented a president with a bronze miniature of Remington’s Bronco Buster. In their most famous engagement, this group charged up the Kettle and San Juan Hills in Cuba. For ten points, name this volunteer cavalry unit that was led by Teddy Roosevelt during the Spanish American War.
Answer: Rough Riders (or the 1st United

3951. Edward Nkoloso trained people in this occupation by rolling them down hills in oil drums in Zambia. Yang Liwei’s work in this occupation as part of the Shenzhou project culminated in 2003. Ilan Ramon became the first Israeli citizen to carry out this job. In 1962, the citizens of Perth, Australia turned on their lights to honor an American in this occupation passing overhead. For ten points, name this occupation held by the Mercury Seven, including John Glenn, many of whom rode Saturn V [five] rockets into space.
Answer: astronauts (

3952. This prime minister fired Srinivas Kumar Sinha because he refused to plan an attack against Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale; that attack eventually included the shelling of the Harmandir Sahib and was codenamed Operation Blue Star. In retaliation for that attack on Amritsar, this leader's Sikh bodyguards assassinated her in 1984. For ten points, name this Indian prime minister, the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru.
Answer: Indira Gandhi Second Quarter

3953. The losing side of this war used an encirclement technique called motti. The winners of this war were able to lease a naval base at Hanko and occupy the city of Vyborg. Its victors suffered heavy losses due to the effects of the Great Purge. The losers were forced to cede Karelia after the fall of the Mannerheim Line, despite the use of ski troops. The Continuation War followed, for ten points, what conflict between Finland and the Soviet Union, simultaneous with the start of World War II?
Answer: Winter War BONUS: Finnish troops in the Winter War developed a makeshift anti-tank weapon named for this man, the Soviet foreign minister. Vyacheslav Molotov (

3954. This country controls an archipelago with capital at Funchal that is known for a variety of fortified wine. This country’s second-largest city sits at the mouth of the Douro River and lends its name to another fortified wine. This country transferred control of its Macau colony to China in 1999. Porto and the Madeiras are found in this nation, which is largely coextensive with the Roman province of Lusitania. For ten points, name this country with capital at Lisbon, which shares the Iberian Peninsula with Spain.
Answer: Portugal (or Portuguese Republic) BONUS: In addition to Madeira, Portugal also controls this other Atlantic archipelago, including the islands of Santa Maria and Terceira. It was discovered in an expedition sponsored by Henry the Navigator. Azores Page 2

3955. Thanks to a speech noting that “Caesar had his Brutus; Charles I his Cromwell,” this man was accused of treason towards George III. In another speech, this man asked “is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and liberty?” For ten points, name this Virginian Founding Father who declared “Give me liberty or give me death!”
Answer: Patrick Henry BONUS: Patrick Henry’s treasonous speech was given within his first two weeks as a member of this Virginian legislative body. House of Burgesses

3956. This party launched the Chakrabarti Inquiry after several of its own members made anti-Semitic statements. CCTV footage showed this party’s leader walking past available train seats in order to show that rail privatization has led to a shortage of space. Owen Smith lost this party’s 2016 leadership election, which was triggered after a vote of no confidence following Brexit. For ten points, name this party led by Jeremy Corbyn, the current opposition party in the British House of Commons.
Answer: Labour Party of the United Kingdom BONUS: Owen Smith received support for the Labour leadership from this former leader of the Labour Party. He stepped down after the Tories won the

3957. Laws enacted during this period included tax reform that returned land to the government and the replacement of the han system with prefectures. A group of reforms during this period were outlined in the Charter Oath. In this period, a group of daimyo fought the Boshin War against the government, and the Satsuma Rebellion was launched by discontented samurai. For ten points, name this period of 19th century modernization in Japan in which the emperor was restored to power.
Answer: Meiji Restoration (

3958. This man began his “New Course” by appointing Leo von Caprivi as chancellor. He flew into a rage during an interview with the Daily Telegraph and sent the gunboat Panther to start the Agadir Crisis. This man replaced Helmuth von Moltke the Younger with Erich von Falkenhayn after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan. This grandson of Victoria supported Austria after the death of Franz Ferdinand and dismissed Otto von Bismarck. For ten points, name this last Kaiser of Germany, who ruled during World War I.
Answer: Wilhelm II (or William II) BONUS: Wilhelm II appointed this man Chief of the General Staff in the second half of World War I. He later served as president of the Weimar Republic. Paul von Hindenburg Page 3

3959. This character says “It is always better / to avenge dear ones than to indulge in mourning” to a grieving friend after the death of a man whose name translates as “ash army.” This character once lost a week-long swimming contest to his friend Breca. This man, who dies in combat with a dragon, is the subject of a poem that was translated by Seamus Heaney. For ten points, name this hero who kills Grendel and Grendel’s mother in an Old English epic poem.
Answer: Beowulf BONUS: This author claimed that the value of Beowulf as poetry, rather than as a historical document, had been overlooked in the English literary tradition in his lecture Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics. J.R.R. Tolkien (or John Ronald Reuen Tolkien)

3960. This country contains a natural gas fire known as Yanar Dag, and is home to Neft Daslari, or Oil Rocks, the first offshore drilling platform in the world. This country controls the exclave of Nakhchivan and fought a war with its western neighbor that ended with the Bishkek Protocol. It is home to the lowest-lying national capital in the world, which sits on the Absheron Peninsula in the Caspian Sea. Baku is the capital of, for ten points, what post-Soviet state that fought a war with Armenia?
Answer: Republic of Azerbaijan BONUS: Calling itself the Republic of Artsakh, this region is officially part of Azerbaijan but is controlled by ethnically Armenian separatists. Nagorno-Karabakh Third Quarter The categories are ...

3961. Industry that was a source of the Medici wealth, as well as that of the Rothschild and Fugger families.
Answer: banking (

3962. “Magnificent” member of the Medici family who patronized Botticelli and Michelangelo.
Answer: Lorenzo the Magnificent

3963. Tuscan capital city that was the primary seat of the Medici family
Answer: Florence or Firenze

3964. Conspiracy that targeted Giuliano de Medici for death. It was sponsored by Sixtus IV.
Answer: Pazzi Conspiracy

3965. Medici Queen of France, the wife of Henry II.
Answer: Catherine de’ Medici

3966. Rival family in Renaissance Italy whose members included Cesare (CHAY-sar-ay) and Lucrezia
Answer: Borgia Page 4

3967. Position, the head of the British government, that Walpole was the first to hold in 1721.
Answer: Prime Minister (

3968. Name shared by the two British monarchs served by Walpole, the first two to take the name.
Answer: George (I and/or II)

3969. Prominent tower where Walpole was imprisoned by his political enemies.
Answer: Tower of London

3970. Political party to which Walpole belonged. They opposed the Tories and the concept of absolute monarchy.
Answer: Whig Party

3971. Position held by Walpole as a junior minister, equivalent to America’s Secretary of the Treasury.
Answer: Chancellor of the Exchequer

3972. Credit bubble that occurred during Walpole’s rule, as a joint-stock company for trade in South America crashed.
Answer: South Sea Bubble North Africa in World War II Name the...

3973. British-controlled waterway connecting the Mediterranean and Red Seas, an essential target in North Africa.
Answer: Suez Canal

3974. Country that sent the Afrika Korps to fight in North Africa but was forced to retreat to allied Italy.
Answer: Nazi Germany

3975. Commander of the Afrika Korps who gained the nickname “Desert Fox” for his success in Africa.
Answer: Erwin Rommel

3976. Final British commander in North Africa. His Eighth Army won the Battle of El Alamein.
Answer: Bernard Law Montgomery

3977. British island with capital Valetta where submarines and airplanes targeted enemy shipping in the Mediterranean.
Answer: Malta

3978. Operation name for the Anglo-American invasion of North Africa, which landed in French-held territory in November 1942.
Answer: Operation Torch (

3979. The first Boeing 747 to suffer an accident was this airline’s Flight 540 in 1974; 55 people died in Kenya in its worst disaster. In 1977, one of this airline’s planes was stormed by members of GSG 9, ending a hostage crisis by Palestinian hijackers who wanted the release of members of the Red Army (+) Faction. In 1972, another of this airline’s planes was hijacked, leading to the release of three members of Black September who committed the Munich massacre. (*) Cologne serves as headquarters for, for ten points, what largest German airline?
Answer: Deutsche Lufthansa AG Page 5

3980. This man and William Pinkney produced a never-ratified agreement to extend Jay’s Treaty. This man provoked a controversy by allowing Andrew Jackson to cross international borders during the (+) Seminole War. William Plumer voted for Richard Rush and John Quincy Adams instead of Daniel Tompkins and this man, becoming the only elector to vote against him in 1820. The Era of Good (*) Feelings was led by, for ten points, what President who protected Latin America from European interference with a famous doctrine?
Answer: James Monroe

3981. Shortly after this city was defeated at Tebas, its king Yusuf I requested aid from the Marinids to fight the Battle of Tarifa. When this city’s king Boabdil was forced into exile, he allegedly looked back wistfully at this city at a mountain pass now known as the (+) “Moor’s sigh.” The Nasrids established a kingdom in this city shortly after the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa. This city’s (*) Alhambra fortress was captured during the Reconquista. For ten points, name this city, the former capital of a Muslim emirate in southern Spain.
Answer: Granada

3982. Prince Asuka was given immunity for events in this city, which was captured by the army of Matsui Iwane. A safe zone in this city was created by John Rabe, a German businessman, saving thousands of lives. This capital of the (+) Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and the Republic of China was the site of a contest to kill 100 civilians with a sword and other such war crimes. (*) For ten points, name this Chinese city that, in 1937, was subjected to a “rape” by invading Japanese forces.
Answer: Nanking (or Nanjing

3983. Johannes Ockeghem wrote the first surviving polyphonic example of this composition. Berlioz wrote one of these pieces with four brass bands to commemorate the July Revolution. These pieces normally feature a (+) hymn attributed to Thomas of Celano. Another of these pieces includes a trombone solo in its “Tuba Mirum” section and was completed by Franz Sussmayr after its composer died while working on its “Lacrimosa.” A “Dies Irae” is usually found in, (*) for ten points, what type of composition that was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s last, a mass for the dead?
Answer: requiems (or requiem mass)

3984. After this man’s citizen militia fled, the Spanish sacked the city of Prato in 1512, ending the rule of Piero Soderini. This man wrote that “because Fortune is a (+) woman, one must thrash her to have one’s way with her,” and he discussed the first 10 books of the History of Rome in his Discourses on Livy. Another work by this author views Cesare Borgia as a model (*) ruler, claims that it is better to be feared than to be loved. and was dedicated to Lorenzo d’Medici. For ten points, name this Italian author of The Prince.
Answer: Niccolo Machiavelli Page 6

3985. This scientist discovered that stereoisomers of tartaric acid rotate polarized light in opposite directions. He saved the silk industry in his country by determining that silkworms were dying from an infectious disease called (+) flacherie. This scientist was able to save Joseph Meister from a dog bite due to his research into a (*) vaccine for rabies. For ten points, name this French scientist whose namesake process removes harmful microorganisms from milk.
Answer: Louis Pasteur

3986. This man ended a mutiny by declaring to his men “I am waiting for the tanks and the Americans” before launching another attack. After Erich von Falkenhayn declared that he would bleed this man’s troops (+) white in one battle, this man allegedly rallied his men with the cry “they shall not pass.” The “Sacred Way” supply line was established by this (*) marshal, who worked with Pierre Laval in a post-military position that earned him life imprisonment. For ten points, name this war hero at Verdun who collaborated with the Nazis as the head of Vichy France.
Answer: (Henri-)Philippe Petain

3987. This commodity partially titles a historiography by Allan Kulikoff that argues that its production created a caste system, partially because it involved a gang system rather than a task system. Glasgow merchants who imported this commodity from the (+) American colonies were referred to as its namesake “lords.” This primary cash commodity of colonial (*) Virginia and North Carolina was first commercially raised in North America by John Rolfe in the early 1600s. For ten points, name this crop whose leaves are used to form cigars.
Answer: tobacco (

3988. The losing side in this battle had earlier been forced to face Harald Hardrada at Stamford Bridge. The housecarls took a defensive position upon the Senlac Hill during this battle, though they could not prevent Harold Godwinson from being hit in the eye by an arrow, as depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry. For ten points, name this 1066 victory for William the Conqueror.
Answer: Battle of Hastings

3989. One of these figures replicated the enemy’s crest on the lanterns of his troops to gain entrance into that enemy’s army. A famous person of this type nicknamed “Devil” led his lord to safety through Iga province. Hattori Hanzo was a member of this profession, also known as shinobi, who served Tokugawa Ieyasu. For ten points, name these stealthy mercenaries from feudal Japan.
Answer: ninja (

3990. An important action early in this war was the use of air strikes to drive back an attack on the city of Khafji. Northern and southern no-fly zones were established at the 32nd and 36th parallels after this war, in which the losing side’s retreating columns were decimated in the Highway of Death. For ten points, name this 1991 war in which coalition forces liberated Kuwait from Iraqi control.
Answer: First Gulf War (

3991. A recent Tuareg rebellion in the north of this country proclaimed the state of Azawad with its capital at Gao. This country is named for an empire that was founded by Sundiata. The Ghana Empire once ruled in what is now, for ten points, what arid West African country, the home of Timbuktu and Bamako?
Answer: Republic of Mali

3992. A one-week war named for this activity began with a bombing raid conducted by passenger aircraft and was fought between El Salvador and Honduras. While performing this activity, Diego Maradona executed a controversial, “miraculous” feat dubbed the Hand of God. The 2018 and 2022 world championships of this activity will be held in Russia and, controversially, Qatar, thanks to FIFA bribery. For ten points, name this sport played by Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi.
Answer: association football (or soccer; do not

3993. The action of raising the djed [jed] was performed to honor them at a celebration sometimes called the Feast of the Tail. That event, the Heb Sed, allowed one of these figures to establish the Amarna heresy. They were the pre-eminent preservers of the fundamental order of the universe, a concept known as Maat. One of these people mandated worship of a sun-disk known as Aten, and concurrently changed his own name to Akhenaten. For ten points, name these semi-divine rulers of ancient Egypt.
Answer: ancient Egyptian pharaohs

3994. This group gained support after allying with Norodom Sihanouk in an attempt to overthrow Lon Nol. After escaping this group, Dith Pran exposed their policy of mass murder in the “killing fields.” Under Pol Pot, this group attempted to transform its country into an agrarian society. For ten points, name this Communist regime that briefly controlled Cambodia.
Answer: Khmer Rouge Page 1

3995. In 1899, four reporters from Denver published a fake news story claiming that Americans were to replace this object with a road. William Pogue claimed to have seen this entity from low Earth orbit, before realizing that he was actually looking at the Grand Canal. For ten points, name this entity that cannot actually be seen from space with the unaided eye, a massive set of fortifications that started protecting against Mongol invasion in the third century BC.
Answer: Great Wall of China (

3996. This leader ordered bishops to be burned at the stake as part of the Heresy Acts and made Reginald Pole Archbishop of Canterbury and principal advisor. Her marriage to Philip II and her Catholicism led to severe dissent among her subjects. For ten points, name this daughter of Henry VIII and sister of Elizabeth, a Queen noted for her many executions.
Answer: Mary I (or Bloody Mary or Mary Tudor

3997. An abandoned city in this country is centered on an “Avenue of the Dead” and is home to a fresco showing a ritual blood-letting. The sites of San Lorenzo and La Venta in this country included depictions of jaguars and ball courts. The Codex Mendoza shows the founding of an empire’s capital city near Lake Texcoco in this country. For ten points, name this modern country, the home of the Olmec and Aztec civilizations.
Answer: Mexico BONUS: This Aztec capital was founded at the site where an eagle perched on a cactus. After the Spanish conquest, Mexico City was built over this city. Tenochtitlan

3998. The Battle of Villalar was one episode in an uprising against this man called the Revolt of the Comuneros. His army captured Francis I at the Battle of Pavia, and he condemned Martin Luther. For ten points, name this man who ruled as Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain after 4 other men who shared his name.
Answer: Charles V (

3999. The Royal Navy ship HMS Amethyst was trapped on this river for several months in 1949. A 1954 flood of this river devastated Hubei Province, and a series of canyons along its banks are the site of a project that displaced 1.3 million people and started producing power in 2003. This river is referred to in its native country as Chang Jiang. The Three Gorges Dam was built on, for ten points, what Chinese river that empties into the sea near Shanghai?
Answer: Yangtze River (or Chang Jiang before mentioned) Page 2

4000. In response to revelations regarding NSA surveillance, this country’s leader said that “the Internet is uncharted territory for us all.” Former President of European Parliament Martin Schulz announced his intentions to run as the Social Democratic Candidate in October 2017 elections in this country. Recep Erdogan [aird-oh-wan] accused this country of “Nazi practices” after pro-Erdogan rallies were cancelled in Nordrhein-Westfalen. For ten points, name this country led by the Christian Democratic Union under Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland) BONUS: Another German political party running in the October

4001. During a protest in this city organized by Vanessa Wruble, this city’s police force made no arrests. Sean Spicer’s description of another event in this city used “alternative facts,” according to Kellyanne Conway on Meet the Press. This city’s Metro system saw its ridership decrease, compared to a normal weekday, by 10% on January 20th, 2017. For ten points, name this city that hosted a Women’s March the day after hosting Donald Trump’s poorly-attended inauguration.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

4002. This ruler launched a failed coup at Strasbourg and was imprisoned in a fortress at Ham. This man, who was opposed by Adolphe Thiers in the National Assembly, sought to protect Constantinople by starting the Crimean War and was captured in 1870 at the Battle of Sedan during a disastrous defeat to Prussia. For ten points, name this final Emperor of France.
Answer: Napoleon III (or Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte; do not

4003. The US Marines incorporated this game into an ad with the caption “Get off the firing line [...] that’s a safety violation!” Norwegian Prime Minister Erna Solberg was photographed playing this game during a Parliament session. In a 2016 speech, Hillary Clinton attempted to capitalize on this game’s popularity with a Get Out the Vote pun. Nintendo’s stock value surged by 120 percent in the week following the release of, for ten points, what Niantic mobile game in which users may find a Pikachu while taking a walk?
Answer: Pokemon Go (

4004. Country that Thatcher led in the 1980s.
Answer: United Kingdom (or Great Britain or England)

4005. Political party led by Thatcher against the Labour Party.
Answer: Conservative and Unionist Party (or Tory Party)

4006. Russian leader whom she praised, saying “we can do business together” in 1984.
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

4007. Drink that Thatcher was accused of “snatching” from poor children as Education Secretary.
Answer: milk

4008. Industry that went on a failed strike in the winter of 1984 under the leadership of Arthur Scargill.
Answer: coal mining (

4009. Chancellor of the Exchequer under Thatcher and her successor as Prime Minister.
Answer: John Major Nicholas II Name the...

4010. Title held by Nicholas II as ruler of Russia.
Answer: tsar

4011. Conflict that Nicholas II died during, leading to the rise of the Soviet Union.
Answer: World War I

4012. Grandmother of Nicholas II, a long-lived Queen of Britain whose descendants married into many royal houses.
Answer: Queen Victoria

4013. Russian mystic whom Nicholas employed to treat his son’s hemophilia.
Answer: Grigori Rasputin

4014. Dynastic house that Nicholas II belonged to. It began to rule Russia in 1613.
Answer: House of Romanov

4015. Politician that headed the Provisional Government after the abdication of Nicholas and was overthrown by the Bolsheviks, beginning the October Revolution.
Answer: Alexander Kerensky Page 4

4016. Country that occupied Japan after World War II.
Answer: United

4017. Organization that Japan was prevented from having in its new constitution.
Answer: a military (

4018. Emperor that announced the Japanese surrender with the 1945 Jewel Voice Broadcast.
Answer: Hirohito (or Emperor Showa)

4019. Son of that emperor, who succeeded him and continues to rule.
Answer: Akihito

4020. Post-war Japanese industry, including Mitsubishi and Toyota, that rivals Detroit’s “Big 3.”
Answer: automobile industry (

4021. World’s largest battleship that Japan lost in 1945
Answer: Yamato Fourth Quarter

4022. An equestrian statue of this city’s founder was camouflaged with sandbags to protect it during World War II and sits on the massive Thunder Stone. An institute for girls in this city was the site of the (+) Kirov assassination. Nevsky Prospekt is the main street of this city, which contains the Bronze Horseman and Smolny Isntitute. This city on the mouth of the Neva River is home to the (*) Winter Palace, which housed the tsar from 1732 to 1917. For ten points, name this city, which was known as Leningrad in the Soviet era.
Answer: St. Petersburg (

4023. The Morley-Minto reforms allowed this region to have a degree of self-governance. This region was divided into provinces and princely states and garrisoned by three Presidency armies. The independence of this region was the subject of an agreement with Lord Irwin at a Round Table Conference, as well as the earlier (+) Lucknow Pact. This region came under direct rule after the (*) Sepoy Mutiny and the dissolution of its ruling company. For ten points, name this former British colony ruled from Calcutta and New Delhi.
Answer: the (British) Raj (or British India)

4024. This country rejected the Spa Conference by annexing Teschen and Zaolzie [zow’l-zhay]. This country held on the Kresy [kress-ay] region with help from the Lwow [l’vov] Eaglets. One leader of this country promoted the idea of an Intermarium plan, which led to a war where this country drew its border at the (+) Curzon Line and stopped a Soviet advance in the Miracle on the (*) Vistula. For ten points, name this country, which was divided by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union in 1939 and whose capital is Warsaw.
Answer: Poland Page 5

4025. In a propaganda poster published after this event, a woman with outstretched arms holds out a weapon underneath the caption “Take Up the Sword of Justice.” Broadway producer Charles Frohman was a victim of this event, as was Alfred Vanderbilt, who was last seen trying to save a (+) mother and child. Captain William Turner survived being swept overboard during this event, which occurred eleven miles off the Irish coast and took only 18 minutes. Walther Schwieger’s (*) U-boat caused, for ten points, what 1915 sinking of a British liner, an act of war that helped push the United States into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania (

4026. This man was able to capture Kimpo airfield after landings at Red, Blue, and Green beaches in Operation Chromite. This man was replaced by Matthew Ridgway, despite leading a difficult (+) landing at Inchon, after a series of disagreements with Harry Truman in the Korean War. In another conflict, this commander vowed “I (*) shall return” when the Japanese forced him to retreat from the Philippines. For ten points, name this American general who commanded Allied troops in the Pacific Theatre of World War II.
Answer: Douglas MacArthur

4027. This man massacred the crew of the Miri while attempting to force a treaty upon the Zamorin. Nicolau Coelho [ko-way-loh] delivered reports of this man’s successes to Manuel I after the Berrio managed to reach port faster than the flagship Sao Gabriel. Under the sponsorship of (+) Henry the Navigator, this man landed in Calicut by following Bartolomeu Dias’ route around the (*) Cape of Good Hope. For ten points, name this first European explorer to reach India by sea.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

4028. The occurrence of one of these events during a battle between the Medes and the Lydians caused both sides to put down their weapons and declare peace. Certain predictions from Einstein’s theory of general relativity were confirmed following Arthur Eddington’s observation of (+) light deflection during one of these events in 1919. Historians have attempted to place the exact date of Good Friday by assuming that the (*) darkness described at Jesus’ crucifixion was one of these events. For ten points, name these events in which the moon passes between the Sun and the Earth.
Answer: solar eclipse (

4029. After this man added battering rams to his armies for a successful campaign, Anatolius negotiated peace with him on behalf of Theodosius. In one battle, this man’s camp was accidentally stumbled upon by Thorismund. This man was finally defeated by (+) Flavius Aetius and Theodoric I at the Catalaunian Plains. This brother of Bleda allegedly died of a nosebleed on the night of his marriage to a Gothic bride. (*) In 452, Pope Leo convinced this man to refrain from attacking Rome. For ten points, name this “Scourge of God,” a 5th-century ruler of the Huns.
Answer: Attila the Hun Page 6

4030. This man lost a statewide election after John Crittenden’s endorsement swung support to his rival. This man’s rival issued the Freeport Doctrine supporting popular sovereignty during a series of senatorial (+) debates; this man eventually lost that 1858 election in Illinois, but soundly defeated his rival, Stephen (*) Douglas, two years later in a Presidential election. For ten points, name this politician who thus led the United States into the Civil War.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln BONUS: A brutal civil war in this nation was known as La Violencia. It fought a guerilla war against FARC with the aid of the United

4031. In 1990, this country’s no-party Panchayat system was reformed by King Birendra. Gyanendra rose to power in this country after a 2001 massacre of the royal family. The April 2015 Gorkha earthquake killed over 9,000 people in this country, including 21 in an avalanche on Mount Everest. For ten points, name this Himalayan country with capital Kathmandu.
Answer: Nepal

4032. Sopwith Camels were equipped with two of these devices, often produced by Lewis. The capture of Roland Garros’ equipment helped German engineers develop synchronization gear, permitting these closed-bolt weapons to operate through the gaps of a spinning propeller. The Browning M1919 replaced many Vickers-produced examples of, for ten points, what weapons that were mounted on World War I-era aircraft and could fire hundreds of bullets per minute?
Answer: machine gun (

4033. In this country, Plinio Salgado founded the fascist Integralist party which was disbanded with all other political parties in 1937. Getulio Vargas, modernized this country’s economy as part of the Estado Novo. Lula da Silva led this country in the early 21st century, which also hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup. For ten points, name this South American country whose Old Republic was dominated by an oligarchy in Sao Paulo.
Answer: Brazil

4034. Permutations of this event are overseen by the Yellow Card Man in a 2011 Stephen King novel titled for the date of this event. This event, the subject of Libra and 11/22/63, was carried out from a school book depository in Dallas. For ten points, name this Presidential murder carried out by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Answer: assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy (or assassination of JFK

4035. Woodrow Wilson nearly died in this event, which was first reported in the United States at Camp Funston in Fort Riley, Kansas. This event, which killed about five percent of the world’s population, was spread across the globe by soldiers near the end of World War I. For ten points, name this 1918 pandemic, commonly named for an Iberian country that didn’t censor the high death toll.
Answer: Spanish flu pandemic (

4036. During this man’s reign, his forces broke a blockade of the Hanko Peninsula in the Battle of Gangut, his country’s first naval victory. A major victory during his reign was the capture of Azov. He reorganized his government with the Table of Ranks and defeated a revolt by the streltsy. He studied shipbuilding in the Netherlands as part of his Great Tour to learn more about Western Europe. For ten points, name this “Great” modernizing tsar of Russia.
Answer: Peter I (or Peter the Great; just Peter is needed after “Great” is said) Page 1

4037. George Buchanan claimed these instruments were used instead of trumpets during battle starting in the mid-16th century. Contrary to legend, this musical instrument was not actually banned by the Proscription Act of 1746. The uilleann [ill-yin] variety of this instrument makes sound through drones and an unusually wide-ranging chanter and is popular in Ireland. A goatskin sac is used to store air in, for ten points, what instrument whose Great Highland variety is from Scotland?
Answer: bagpipes

4038. One king of this name was opposed by Simon de Montfort and forced to sign the Provisions of Oxford, the first written constitution of his country. Another king of this name signed the Treaty of Wallingford to secure power and established the Plantagenet dynasty. The most famous king of this name fathered Elizabeth I and divorced Anne Boleyn in his search for a male heir. For ten points, give this name, held by eight English kings, the last of which had six wives.
Answer: Henry (

4039. One of this group’s members was forced out after raising a large force to defeat Sextus in Sicily. This group launched proscriptions against prominent politicians like Cicero. One member of this group divorced another’s sister to ally himself with Cleopatra. For ten points, name this political alliance of the late Roman Republic that failed to stop a civil war between two of its members, Octavian and Mark Antony.
Answer: Second Triumvirate (

4040. This city feuded with Ercole d’Este (air-col-lay DESS-tay) over mines at Commachio in the Salt War. This city was first settled at Torcello by people fleeing the sack of Altinum by Atilla the Hun. Pope Julius II initially targeted this city in the War of the League of Cambrai, then allied with it against France. This city’s leader, Enrico Dandalo, convinced the Fourth Crusade to sack Zara and Constantinople. For ten points, name this Queen of the Adriatic, an Italian city famed for its canals.
Answer: (Most Serene) Republic of Venice BONUS: The Old Foundry in Venice’s Canaletto district was the site of the first of these places, in which Jews were forced to live. ghetto Page 2

4041. This empire was ruled by an Amorite dynasty until a sack by the Hittites and an occupation by the Kassites. This empire rivaled, then allied with, the Medians to their north. This empire was refounded after the death of the powerful Assyrian king Ashurbanipal. A law code that governed this empire contained the principle of “an eye for an eye,” and its capital city legendarily featured intricate hanging gardens. For ten points, name this Mesopotamian empire ruled by Hammurabi.
Answer: Babylonian Empire (

4042. The Hercynian Forest stretched eastward from this river in antiquity, and the Ubii lived along its banks. A crisis was sparked in 1840 when Adolph Thiers proposed this river as a border. This river shares a delta with the Scheldt and Meuse that was the site of heavy damage in the 1953 North Sea flood. A legendary rock known as Lorelei overlooks, for ten points, what major Western European river that, like the Danube, formed much of the northern border of the Roman Empire?
Answer: Rhine River BONUS: What city on the banks of the Rhine, founded by the Romans as the capital of Germania Inferior, is the fourth-largest in Germany and is home to a Gothic cathedral that was finally completed in

4043. Charles-Gilbert Romme created one of these for the French Republic in 1792, although it was abolished by the Catholic Church in the Concordat of 1801. That one of these things was later used for 18 days during the Paris Commune. Because one of these things wasn’t accepted in Russia until 1918, the February Revolution actually began in March. For ten points, name these temporal systems, including a Julian one that was reformed by Pope Gregory XIII.
Answer: calendars BONUS: As part of a push for standardization of units and measures during the French Revolution, the French Republican Calendar had this many days in a week and this many hours in a day. 10

4044. This country was the site of the first coup d’etat broadcast over radio, which occurred after the success of Operation Weserubung. The fascist Nasjonal Samling party formed a collaboration government in this country under Vidkun Quisling. In 1940, paratroopers managed to capture this country’s city of Narvik in an attempt to control iron ore shipments from Sweden. For ten points, name this Scandinavian nation invaded by the Nazis, who occupied Oslo.
Answer: Norway BONUS: The disastrous Allied attempt to save Norway resulted in the resignation of this British prime minister, who claimed there would be “peace in our time” after the Munich Agreement with Hitler. Neville Chamberlain Page 3

4045. This man disfigured his left eyebrow after jumping out a window when his wife caught him in a room with a nurse. A helicopter operator supposedly heard “two loud booms” during the jet crash that took this man’s life. A training facility named after him is found in Star City. In April 1961, this man exclaimed “Poyekhali” after successfully leaving Site No. 1 at Baikonur during the Vostok 1 mission. For ten points, name this Russian cosmonaut who was the first human in space.
Answer: Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin BONUS: Another landmark Russian space traveler was Laika, an example of which animal, who on Sputnik 2, became the first animal to orbit Earth? Dog Third Quarter: The categories are ...

4046. Capital city, where Carl XVI [16] Gustav has reigned since 1973.
Answer: Stockholm

4047. Country to the east that was dominated by Sweden until its annexation by Russia.
Answer: Finland

4048. Country to the south that fought with Sweden over the province of Scania.
Answer: Denmark

4049. Institution abolished by Magnus IV of Sweden. It resulted in a largely free peasant class, but Sweden still engaged in the African form of this institution until 1813.
Answer: slavery (or thralls)

4050. Religion of the Church of Sweden. It joined the Thirty Years’ War to help other followers of this religion in the Holy Roman Empire.
Answer: Lutheranism (

4051. Royal house that ruled Sweden with the ascension of Gustav I.
Answer: House of Vasa

4052. This man and Engels published the Communist Manifesto.
Answer: Karl Marx

4053. This country’s constitutional monarchy, led by Louis XVIII [18], was overthrown.
Answer: France

4054. A series of revolutions in this modern-day country led to the election of the Frankfurt Parliament.
Answer: Germany

4055. A nationalist movement in Wallachia pushed for the creation of this country with capital at Bucharest.
Answer: Romania

4056. An independence war started in this country and ended a year later at the Siege of Buda.
Answer: Hungary

4057. The government of this nation rejected a constitution for its southern region of Schleswig-Holstein.
Answer: Denmark Page 4

4058. Capital city of Cuba, where the USS Maine was sunk.
Answer: Havana

4059. Revolutionary who led Cuba through the second half of the 20th century. His brother, Raul, is currently president.
Answer: Fidel Castro

4060. Weapons stationed on Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1962 to threaten the United States.
Answer: ballistic missiles (

4061. Type of economic action taken by the United States to prevent trade with Cuba.
Answer: embargo

4062. Attempted 1961 invasion by CIA-backed rebels, driven off by the Cuban government.
Answer: Bay of Pigs Invasion (

4063. Marxist revolutionary, instrumental in the 1959 Cuban revolution, who also aided movements in the Congo and Bolivia.
Answer: Che Guevara (

4064. This ruler’s forces were victorious at Kozludzha, allowing for an annexation of the Crimea in the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji. Disgruntled peasants attempted to overthrow this ruler in the (+) Pugachev revolt. Sham villages were allegedly constructed so that Grigory Potemkin could impress this ruler, who was brought to power in a coup against (*) her husband, Peter III. For ten points, name this patron of Denis Diderot and Voltaire, an enlightened tsarina of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II)

4065. A church in this country, Our Lady Mary of Zion, claims to hold the Ark of the Covenant. The easternmost portion of this country was invaded in the 1977 Ogaden War. Although this country’s largest ethnic group is the (+) Oromo, its official language, written with the Ge’ez script, is Amharic. Lake Tana, the source of the Blue Nile, is located in this country, which was once ruled by the communist (*) Derg regime and lost its Red Sea coastline in 1993. Eritrea declared independence from, for ten points, what East African country whose capital is Addis Ababa?
Answer: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

4066. The protagonist of this novel duels an officer after he perceives an insult to his wife at the English Club, then later obsesses over killing an enemy monarch who is occupying a foreign capital. This novel depicts the obese, one-eyed General (+) Kutuzov as a spiritual man who kneels in thanks before an icon. Princess Helene dies near the end of this book, which contains lengthy descriptions of the (*) Battles of Austerlitz and Borodino. For ten points, name this novel set during Napoleon’s invasion of Russia by Leo Tolstoy.
Answer: War and Peace (or Voyna i mir)

4067. This dynasty, which earlier fought the Xiongnu barbarians, was briefly interrupted when the Liu family was overthrown by Wang Mang. The Celestial Masters launched the (+) Five Pecks of Rice revolt against this dynasty in an attempt to rid the world of decadence. The Yellow Turban Rebellion brought this dynasty to an end, leading to the (*) Three Kingdoms Period. Liu Bang founded, for ten points, what dynasty that shares its name with the dominant ethnicity in China?
Answer: Han dynasty Page 5

4068. An early proponent of this cause was mayor Neal Dow, who crafted the short-lived Maine Law. Wayne Wheeler pioneered “pressure politics” in support of this cause. Another advocate for this cause was known for using a (+) hatchet to destroy contraband. The Volstead Act provided legal backing to this cause, which was supported by Carrie Nation and a (*) Women’s Christian Union. For ten points, name this cause that became national policy with the passing of the 18th Amendment, then was revoked with the 21st Amendment.
Answer: temperance (or prohibition of alcohol

4069. This man’s strategy of using fortified burhs is documented in the Burghal Hidage. He called together an army at Egbert’s Stone in order to fight at Edington. This man forced the Treaty of (+) Wedmore upon one rival following the siege of Chippenham, ensuring that Guthrum converted to Christianity. The (*) Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was created during his reign. For ten points, name this king of Wessex, the only English monarch to be called “the Great.”
Answer: Alfred the Great

4070. The mother of two of these people asks a favor that angers the rest of this group. Two members of this group were dubbed Boanerges, or “sons of thunder.” On one occasion, a man estimates that this group needs at least 200 (+) denarii-worth of food. The treasurer of this group regularly stole from its funds and accompanied his teacher to the (*) Garden of Gethsemane before betraying him for thirty pieces of silver. For ten points, name this group of twelve men that Jesus called to ministry in the canonical gospels.
Answer: Twelve Apostles (or Twelve Disciples of Jesus)

4071. Alternatively called the Sinews of Peace, this speech claimed that, “from Stettin [...] to (*) Trieste,” the title construct had “descended across the continent.” For ten points, name this speech by Winston Churchill that coined a term for the dividing line between Soviet and non-Soviet spheres.
Answer: Iron Curtain speech (

4072. Alexander Neckham’s On the Nature of Things provides the earliest European account of these devices. The Dream Pool Essays describes how wax was attached to the center of a component of these devices that was then hung from a strain of (+) silk. These devices, which were originally used for divination in feng shui, are one of the Four Great Inventions of China, and they were adapted for (*) maritime use to provide direction during cloudy weather. For ten points, name this navigational device that contains a magnetic needle.
Answer: compass BONUS: What commodity was mined and sold by Cecil Rhodes’ De Beers company, which exploited African labor? diamonds (

4073. This country’s government published the 1995 report “Bringing Them Home”, detailing a genocidal 20th century campaign to remove native children from their homes. Though reconciliation efforts of the “Stolen Generations” included “National Sorry Day” in 1998, it wasn’t until John Howard was succeeded by Kevin Rudd that this country’s Prime Minister apologized. For ten points, name this country where hundreds of thousands of Aboriginal children were kidnapped by a government based in Canberra.
Answer: Australia

4074. This man rose to prominence as a subordinate of John Jervis (JAR-vis) at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent. This man’s forces intercepted Pierre-Charles Villeneuve after they left Cadiz. This man, who lost an arm while leading an attack on Copenhagen, ordered that the message “England expects that every man will do his duty” be sent aboard his flagship, the HMS Victory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.
Answer: Horatio Nelson

4075. These people discovered a “land of stone slabs” that might be the Torngat Mountains. These people harvested lumber from Markland and recorded finding grapes in another area. These people battled against Skraelings and found grapes during their brief settlements in Vinland and at L’Anse Aux Meadows. The first European peoples to land in Canada were, for ten points, what Scandinavians, including the explorer Leif Ericsson?
Answer: Norsemen (or Vikings

4076. A portrait of a man from this city shows him holding his chin in one hand and a teapot he is working on in another. The subject of that work created an engraving addressed to “Unhappy [this city],” showing 5 bleeding men on King Street, including Crispus Attucks. John Singleton Copley worked in this city when he painted Paul Revere and Samuel Adams. For ten points, name this Massachusetts city where British soldiers killed 5 American colonists in a 1770 “Massacre.”
Answer: Boston

4077. In 2017, this city’s fire department introduced water jetpacks as a means to quickly reach burning areas. This city contains the Internet City and Media City free zones, as well as the Jebel Ali zone that boasts the largest man-made harbor in the world. Slave labor has driven a construction boom in, for ten points, what most populous city of the United Arab Emirates and home of the Burj Khalifa, the world’s tallest building?
Answer: Dubai

4078. After securing independence, this man was able to replace the Treaty of Sevres with the Treaty of Lausanne. As part of the “Six Arrows” ideology, this leader banned the fez. Years after he won at Gallipoli, this leader established a new capital at Ankara. For ten points, name this founder of modern Turkey.
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

4079. In the Cutter incident, vaccines of this virus were accidentally tainted with live virus. The inventor of the vaccine for this disease defended his decision to not patent it with the rebuttal “Could you patent the sun?” Wild cases of this disease in 2015 were reported only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The “iron lung” was primarily used to assist sufferers of, for ten points, what viral disease whose vaccine was developed by Jonas Salk?
Answer: poliomyelitis

4080. The Army of Knowledge was established in this country to improve literacy during the White Revolution, which was supported by the repression of the SAVAK police. Shortly after the overthrow of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, this country fell under the grasp of the Ayatollah Khomeini. For ten points, name this country, the site of a 444-day-long hostage crisis in the American embassy in Tehran.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran Second Quarter

4081. In 2014, this country lifted its moratorium on the death penalty after over 140 people were killed in an attack on the Army Public School. This country’s national airline was mocked for sacrificing a goat before a flight, in order to fend off bad luck from a December 2016 plane crash that killed 47 people. For 4 months in 2016, this country imposed a ban on Bollywood films. Nawaz Sharif leads, for ten points, what country whose capital is Islamabad?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan BONUS: The aforementioned Pakistani ban on Bollywood films was a response to increasing violence in the Indian-controlled part of this region, where violence was sparked after police killed Burhan Wani of the Hizbul Mujahedeen. Jammu and Kashmir

4082. This island, which was known as Candia while under Venetian rule, was where the Phaistos disc was excavated. This island was home to a Bronze Age civilization that was the target of Arthur Evans’ excavations and which used the still-undeciphered Linear A script. Heraklion is the largest city on, for ten points, what Greek island whose ancient city of Knossos was the center of the Minoan civilization?
Answer: Crete BONUS: A volcanic eruption on this other Aegean island during the second millennium BC may have caused the collapse of the Minoan civilization and has also been called an inspiration for the Atlantis legend. Santorini (or Thera)

4083. When this man took the throne, he killed two of his father’s advisers and his brother Adonijah. This man’s son promised to be harsher to his subjects than this man was, a mistake that led to the division of this man’s kingdom. Earlier, this father of Rehoboam offered a thousand burnt offerings at the Temple he built, for which God gave him wisdom and fabulous wealth. For ten points, name this king of Israel, the son and successor of David.
Answer: Solomon (

4084. The losers of this battle were able to successfully raid the baggage train of the victor of this battle, but lost their commander Charles d’Albret and were forced to sign the Treaty of Troyes. A cavalry charge during this battle was bogged down by mud and ran into stakes, leading to massive losses of knights. For ten points, name this decisive victory for English longbowmen during the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt BONUS: Another decisive victory for England in the Hundred Years War was this 1346 victory for Edward III, which allowed him to capture Calais and proved the importance of the longbow. Battle of Crecy

4085. Shortly before this man’s death, he sent an unsuccessful punitive expedition against the Singhasari kingdom of Java. This man was victorious in the Toluid war against his brother, Ariq Boke, though his attempts to conquer Japan were thwarted by the “divine wind,” kamikaze. The Italian explorer Marco Polo visited this ruler’s capital of Dadu, located in modern day Beijing. For ten points, name this founder of the Yuan Dynasty in China and grandson of Genghis Khan.
Answer: Kublai Khan BONUS: Kublai Khan ordered three invasions into this country, led by the Tran dynasty and the Champa, both of which agreed to become Mongol vassals. In the 19th century, the Nguyen dynasty led this Southeast Asian country. Vietnam

4086. A tunnel built in this city connected Dobrinja [doh-brin-ya] and Butmir, allowing civilian escape and the inflow of humanitarian aid. Stanislav Galic [gall-itch] was convicted of crimes against humanity for his actions in this city. The attacking forces of the Republika Srpska replaced those of the Yugoslav People’s Army in this city, where fighting was ended by the Dayton Accords. For ten points, name this capital city that was brutally besieged during the Bosnian War.
Answer: Siege of Sarajevo BONUS: This type of soldier was deployed in Sarajevo, but failed to stop the violence. These forces, drawn from many different nations, wear distinctive blue helmets. United Nations peacekeepers (or the United Nations Protection Force or UNPROFOR)

4087. This city was attacked after Imre Thokoly asked Kara Mustafa for assistance. Matthias Corvinus captured this city during his conflict with Frederick III. This city was attacked at the end of a campaign for Hungary that began after the Battle of Mohacs [moh-hotch]. The intervention of Polish Winged Hussars under Jan Sobieski saved this city in 1683. For ten points, name this city that was besieged twice by the Ottoman Empire as it tried to defeat Austria.
Answer: Vienna Page 3

4088. Early knowledge about this event was derived from the journals of Patrick Gass. This event’s only casualty was Charles Floyd, who died of appendicitis in present-day Sioux City. A slave named York and the translator Toussaint Charbonneau aided this journey, which Thomas Jefferson ordered to explore the newly bought Louisiana Territory. Sacagawea aided, for ten points, what American expedition into the Western United States?
Answer: Lewis and Clark Expedition (or the Corps of Discovery expedition) BONUS: The Lewis and Clark Expedition

4089. Ancient Greek city where democracy was funded by the silver mines at Laurium.
Answer: Athens

4090. Island where the Romans mined silver behind the protection of Hadrian’s Wall.
Answer: Great Britain or Britannia (do not

4091. Island nation that exported silver from its Iwami Ginzan mines to the Dutch.
Answer: Japan

4092. South American country named for silver. A river that borders it to the north, the Rio de la Plata, is also named for silver.
Answer: Argentina

4093. Kingdom that provided the Habsburgs with silver from the town of Kutna Hora. It came under a personal union with Austria in 1526.
Answer: Bohemia

4094. Region split between Austria and Italy that was home to Habsburg silver mines at St. Johann.
Answer: Tyrol Page 4

4095. French King executed during the Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16]

4096. Parisian prison that was stormed at the beginning of the French Revolution.
Answer: the Bastille Saint-Antoine

4097. Popular, sharp method of execution, which became a symbol of the excessive violence during the Reign of Terror.
Answer: guillotine (

4098. Revolutionary who started the Reign of Terror, which ended with his execution.
Answer: Maximilien Robespierre

4099. Radical journalist and revolutionary who was assassinated by Charlotte Corday in his bath.
Answer: Jean-Paul Marat

4100. Location of a 1789 oath to create a constitution, a pivotal event early in the Revolution.
Answer: a tennis court (

4101. Ancient civilization whose New Kingdom rulers included Ramesses the Great.
Answer: ancient Egypt

4102. Status that Ramesses aspired to achieve. Other beings with this status included Ra and Horus.
Answer: godhood (

4103. Military vehicles that Ramesses used, consisting of a carriage pulled by horses.
Answer: chariots

4104. 1274 BC battle that Ramesses fought against the Hittites
Answer: Battle of Kadesh

4105. Site of Ramesses’s tomb, located near Thebes. The tomb of Tutankhamun was also located here.
Answer: Valley of the Kings

4106. Region to the south, home to the kingdoms of Kush and Meroe, that Ramesses attacked.
Answer: Nubia Fourth Quarter

4107. The busiest cantilever bridge in the world connects this city to Howrah. Located on the Hooghly River, a Home for the Dying was established here by the Missionaries of Charity, led by an (+) Albanian-born nun. This city’s Fort William was the site of a 1756 incident where British prisoners were suffocated in a small room. A (*) “Black Hole” tragedy took place in, for ten points, what Indian city in the Ganges Delta, the capital of West Bengal and adopted home of Mother Teresa?
Answer: Kolkata (or Calcutta)

4108. It’s not Austria, but the two Vienna Awards returned territory that this country had lost in the Treaty of Trianon. Ferenc Szalasi [fer-entz sh-lah-zee] replaced (+) Admiral Miklos Horthy as leader of this country, allowing the Arrow Cross Party to take power. Janos Kadar [yan-osh kah-dar] took power in this country after it tried to leave the (*) Warsaw Pact. For ten points, name this country where Imre Nagy’s [nahj’s] 1956 revolution was crushed by Soviet tanks in Budapest.
Answer: Hungary Page 5

4109. The GIA, a group of Algerian terrorists, bombed this system in 1995, wounding 13 people at Maison Blanche. This system, which was inspired by Fulgence Bienvenue, opened during the (+) 1900 Universal Exposition. It features many Hector Guimard-designed entrances designed in the Art Nouveau style, and in 1930, it purchased a competitor run by the North-South Company, thus incorporating (*) Line 13 from Saint-Lazare. For ten points, name this public transit system of the French capital.
Answer: Paris Metro (

4110. These people established the state of Natalia after recovering a lost treaty from the body of their leader, Piet Retief, who had been executed by Dingaan. Andries Pretorius led these people to victory at the Blood River by utilizing a laager fort against (+) Zulus seeking to disrupt the Great Trek. These people founded the Orange Free State after leaving the (*) British-held Cape Colony. For ten points, name these Dutch-speaking people of South Africa.
Answer: Boers (

4111. For ten points, name this South American independence leader, nicknamed “The Liberator.”
Answer: Simon Bolivar

4112. A French attempt to build this structure failed when Ferdinand de Lesseps was found to be misappropriating funds. The Darien Scheme tried to build this (+) structure, whose construction began in earnest after the Hay-Bunau-Varilla treaty. This structure was returned to the government of Omar Torrijos by (*) Jimmy Carter in 1977. For ten points, name this Central American waterway that links the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal

4113. Catherine Cheynel foiled a surprise attack on this city by Charles Emmanuel I of Savoy by pouring soup on the attackers, which is commemorated in l’Escalade. Jean-Henri Dunant founded an organization in this city after the Battle of (+) Solferino, and a treaty signed in this city defines the term “refugee.” The Hague Conventions updated a series of treaties signed in this city, home to the International (*) Red Cross. For ten points, name this Swiss city, which names conventions concerning treatment of prisoners of war and non-combatants.
Answer: Geneva

4114. This city suffered the “Night of the Black Snow” in 1945. The 20th Air Force frequently attacked this city in Operation Matterhorn. Operation Meetinghouse, which targeted this city (+) for firebombing, was the deadliest single air raid during World War II. A park in (*) Yokoamicho Park commemorates victims of air raids in this city, where the International Military Tribunal for the Far East was held. For ten points, name this Japanese city and capital during World War II.
Answer: Tokyo Page 6

4115. This man conducted the 1955-1958 trans-Antarctic expedition, making him the first person since Robert Scott to reach the (+) South Pole. John Hunt led this man for much of his most famous expedition, in which his team traversed the Khumbu Icefall. This man was knighted for that expedition, unlike (*) Tenzing Norgay, his Sherpa guide. For ten points, name this first person to climb to the summit of Mount Everest.
Answer: Sir Edmund Hillary BONUS: What March

4116. A campaign against these people began when Galerius was told that their existence prevented the Oracle at Delphi from speaking. The catacombs of Rome were predominantly used for the burial of these people. Though these people suffered the Diocletian Persecution and Nero blamed them for causing the Great Fire, they were eventually granted legal status in the 313 AD Edict of Milan. For ten points, name these followers of a monotheistic faith adopted by Constantine the Great.
Answer: Christians (or Christianity)

4117. A theme in Mozart’s twenty-fifth piano concerto is sometimes cited as this song’s source. Pyotr Lavrov wrote a “worker’s” version of this song, which was originally written by Claude Rouget de Lisle as “War Song for the Rhine Army.” A musical depiction of the Battle of Borodino juxtaposes this song with “God Save The Tsar.” This song was quoted in Tchaikovsky’s 1812 Overture, where it represents Napoleon’s army. For ten points, name this revolutionary song, the national anthem of France.
Answer: La Marseillaise [mar-say-ehz] (

4118. This system was an improvement upon one developed for Napoleon’s army by Charles Barbier; that system was night writing. The Grade 2 variety is the most commonly used English type of this system, which was developed by a man who suffered an accident with an awl as a child. For ten points, name this writing system of raised dots used by the blind.
Answer: braille writing

4119. This organization built a fortress at Rabaul and was the target of the Great Turkey Shoot. This military force defeated Force Z, consisting of the Prince of Wales and the Repulse, which had been sent to reinforce Malaya. Its forces were concentrated in the Combined Fleet, which suffered the loss of four aircraft carriers at the Battle of Midway. For ten points, name this military force that fought America in the Pacific Ocean during World War II.
Answer: Imperial Japanese Navy (

4120. An attempt at this process, the Erfurt Union, failed due to the Agreement of Olmutz. A step in this process was the formation of the Zollverein customs union. During the revolutions of 1848, a parliament at Frankfurt sought to perform this action, offering the crown to the King of Prussia. For ten points, name this process of forming a new country governed from Berlin.
Answer: German unification (

4121. This country’s Catatumbo River has more frequent lightning strikes than anywhere else on Earth. A brackish inlet in this country was home to a 1914 oil discovery and an 1823 naval battle that earned this country’s independence from Spain. This country is home to the tallest waterfall in the world, Angel Falls, and the mouth of the Orinoco River. Lake Maracaibo is found in, for ten points, what South American country where a “Bolivarian Revolution” was led by Hugo Chavez?
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Page 1

4122. Though this man was defeated at the Battle of Montgisard, he later formed a truce with Baldwin IV. One campaign against this man was called after his victory at Hattin, though he ended that conflict by granting Christians safe pilgrimage to Jerusalem. For ten points, name this Kurdish founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, an enemy of Richard I in the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (or An-Nasir Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub)

4123. This man claimed that there were 400 neatly marked graves because one soldier slept. As part of Operation Fortitude, this man was assigned command of the fictitious First U.S Army Group. This general led the breakout from Normandy and the relief of the garrison of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge, but was relieved of command after two slapping incidents in North Africa and Sicily. For ten points, name this aggressive commander of the American Third Army during World War II.
Answer: George S. Patton Jr. Second Quarter

4124. An early action during this conflict was the capture of Government House in Stanley. This conflict began on the orders of Leopoldo Galtieri, who lost power as a result. During this war, Exocet missiles were able to destroy the Sheffield, and the Conqueror was able to sink the General Belgrano. This war’s outcome hastened the fall of a military junta while strengthening Margaret Thatcher’s government. For ten points, name this 1982 war between Argentina and Britain over a South Atlantic archipelago.
Answer: Falklands War BONUS: The Falklands War featured one of the few post World War II sinkings by a nuclear-powered ship of this type. Submarine

4125. A tribe of these people called the Senones marched on Rome, demanding that Quintus Fabius be handed over; when he wasn’t, these people won the Battle of the Allia, then cheated the losers with weighted scales for measuring tribute. A chieftain of the Arverni tribe of these people led a massive rebellion of these people until his defeat at the Siege of Alesia. For ten points, name these people, the barbarian inhabitants of modern-day France during Roman times.
Answer: Gauls (

4126. Sculptures of caryatids were used in place of these structures in the Erechtheion on the Athenian acropolis. A temple at Karnak includes enormous examples of these structures decorated with hieroglyphs in its hypostyle courtyard. Their capitals can be decorated with various objects, including acanthus leaves on the top of the Corinthian type. For ten points, name these architectural elements that often bear the weight of a roof.
Answer: columns (

4127. This man’s reputation suffered when two dozen miners were killed in a firefight at his Ludlow colony. Charles Pratt and Henry Rogers decided to work with this man after their companies were priced out in the “Cleveland Massacre.” When this man’s monopoly was found to be in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act, it was split into companies that became Exxon and Mobil. For ten points, name this wealthiest American of all time, the founder of the Standard Oil Company.
Answer: John D. Rockefeller BONUS: Which other wealthy titan of American industry was a dominant figure in the steel industry and is the namesake of both a university in Pittsburgh and a concert venue in New York? Andrew Carnegie

4128. This politician supported Lord Derby’s attempts to pass a Reform Act prohibiting rotten boroughs. This leader’s foreign policies included buying out the Suez Canal Company and ordering a failed invasion of Afghanistan as part of the Great Game with Russia. This politician was a favorite of Queen Victoria and had her crowned as Empress of India. For ten points, name this Conservative prime minister of Great Britain and rival of William Gladstone.
Answer: Benjamin Disraeli BONUS: Disraeli began his political career as a supporter of this prominent Conservative, but eventually opposed him over his repeal of the Corn Laws. This man, who employed William Gladstone in his cabinet, created the first English police force. Sir Robert Peel

4129. A man undergoing this event was told, “Play the man, Master Ridley.” Many people who were suspected of holding “Thyestean banquets” endured this action, to which Pierre de Lancre subjected many Basques. Carbon monoxide poisoning was a common fate for subjects of this action. A military commander who successfully lifted the Siege of Orleans died via, for ten points, what method of execution for Joan of Arc?
Answer: burning at the stake (

4130. This region was united with the Palatinate by Charles Theodore and acquired new territory after the Treaty of Pressburg with Napoleon. A duchy in this region was ruled by the Wittelsbachs and led the Counter-Reformation as a bastion of Catholicism. Its “Mad King,” Ludwig II, built Neuschwanstein [noysh-vahn-stine] castle in this region and allied with Austria against Prussia. For ten points, name this southern state of Germany, governed from Munich.
Answer: Bavaria BONUS: In

4131. Loud rock music was used to flush a leader of this country out of the Vatican embassy, where he had taken refuge. In an attempt to stop drug trafficking in this country, George H.W. Bush authorized military intervention in Operation Just Cause in 1989. For ten points, name this Central American country from which Manuel Noriega was removed from power.
Answer: Panama BONUS: The U.S. Army tried to flush out Manuel Noriega by playing music from this American hard rock group whose hits include “Welcome to the Jungle” and “Paradise City”. Guns and Roses Third Quarter The categories are ...

4132. Public service he began in Philadelphia, which used bucket brigades to put down conflagrations.
Answer: fire department (

4133. Children’s toy he wanted to fly in a thunderstorm as a science experiment.
Answer: kite with a key, attached to the end of the string, in a jar

4134. Annual publication by Franklin that included weather forecasts and his essay “The Way to Wealth.”
Answer: Poor Richard’s Almanack

4135. Modern Ivy League school that Franklin founded as The Academy and College of Philadelphia.
Answer: University of Pennsylvania

4136. Food that caused Franklin to give up vegetarianism; the UK and Iceland “fought” a war over these creatures in 1976.
Answer: cod (

4137. Current US state, named for an English island, whose last Royal Governor was Ben’s son.
Answer: New Jersey Page 4

4138. Empire that Justinian ruled, which grew out of the Eastern Roman Empire.
Answer: Byzantine Empire

4139. Religious official appointed by Justinian, the head of the Roman Catholic Church.
Answer: pope (or Bishop of Rome)

4140. Church built in Constantinople by Justinian. It was converted to a mosque after the Ottoman conquest.
Answer: Hagia Sophia

4141. African city reconquered by Justinian from the Vandals, once the capital of Rome’s rival for the Mediterranean.
Answer: Carthage

4142. Region ruled by Justinian’s rival, the Sassanid Empire, including cities such as Esfahan.
Answer: Persia (

4143. Influential wife of Justinian, who rose from being an actress to Empress.
Answer: Theodora Hong Kong Name the...

4144. Country that currently controls the territory of Hong Kong.
Answer: People’s Republic of China

4145. Country that leased Hong Kong from the Qing [ching] Dynasty.
Answer: United Kingdom (or UK

4146. Conflicts that forced the Qing to give up Hong Kong, fought over an addictive drug.
Answer: Opium Wars

4147. Item that provided protection from tear gas as well as rain during a namesake 2014 movement in Hong Kong.
Answer: Umbrella Revolution (

4148. Nearby former Portuguese colony that, like Hong Kong, is a Special Administrative Region.
Answer: Macau

4149. City that borders Hong Kong on the mainland. It was the first Special Economic Zone.
Answer: Shenzhen Fourth Quarter

4150. One work by this man claims that religion is necessary to support political prosperity and notes that “the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake” against the “insidious wiles of foreign influence.” This man drew an analogy between the interdependence of the (+) north to south and east to west, arguing that decisions must be made as one nation. This man cautioned against the influence of European foreign powers and of the dangers of (*) political parties. For ten points, name this man, who gave counsel to a new nation in his farewell address.
Answer: George Washington Page 5

4151. Two answers required. The fleets of these two nations joined up to defeat Andrea Doria at Ponza. Fears of Habsburg expansion after Charles V’s capture of Tunis led (+) Jean de la Forest to negotiate a military treaty between these two nations. These two nations faced each other in the Battle of the Pyramids during the Egyptian campaign, which marked the end of the 1536 (*) “Unholy Alliance” signed by Francis I and Suleiman the Magnificent. For ten points, name these two European empires, led by Napoleon and Sultan Selim III.
Answer: France and the Ottoman Empire

4152. This body’s legislation was stored in the treasury building, called the Aerarium. A common stalling tactic in this body was to continue speaking until nightfall. This body was forbidden from (+) meeting more than a mile from the pomerium. The Catiline Conspiracy was exposed in a meeting of this body, whose actions could be vetoed by (*) tribunes. Its members were appointed by the censors, often after holding offices like aedile and quaestor. For ten points, name this legislative body of Rome.
Answer: Roman Senate (

4153. This river’s estuary is home to the Shivering Sands and Red Sands forts, which were designed by Guy Maunsell to provide anti-air protection. Several plans have been proposed to build a man-made island in this river’s estuary, possibly near Cliffe in (+) Kent, for use by a new airport to alleviate congestion at (*) Gatwick and Heathrow. For ten points, name this river that, during World War II, provided ground-based navigation for the Luftwaffe as they tried to bomb London.
Answer: River Thames

4154. For his efforts during an attempt at this action, Michel Ney was dubbed the “bravest of the brave.” The truce of Deulino ended a successful instance of this action, which included the Battle of (+) Klushino. A leader fled to the Ottoman Empire after the Great Frost of 1709 doomed an attempt at this action, which ended with a defeat for Adam Leuwenhaupt. A failed attempt at this action was doomed by scorched earth tactics, (*) Cossacks, and “General Winter.” For ten points, name this difficult military action that Napoleon attempted in 1812.
Answer: invading Russia (

4155. Jehan Boinebroke was a merchant who dealt mainly in this good, which Pliny the Elder thought best came from Tarentum. Edward I had increased the duties on this good by a factor of 6 in order to help finance his French campaign. The seat of the (+) speaker of the House of Lords is made of this good to represent its importance to the English economy. A village in Norfolk provides the name for the worsted type of this good, which could be felted if the (*) fibers were soaked. For ten points, name this textile fiber obtained from sheep.
Answer: wool Page 6

4156. Moshe Safdie was inspired by decks of cards for his design of a three-tower resort in this city called the Marina Bay Sands. The Armenian Sarkies Brothers founded a luxury (+) hotel in this city in 1887 and named it for this city’s founder, (*) Sir Stamford Raffles. (*) For ten points, name this Southeast Asian city-state whose economy has flourished in the five decades since it was expelled from Malaysia.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

4157. This colony was founded after the conquest of the Moro people and conflicts with Brunei and Sulu. Ships departing from this colony brought porcelain and china to (+) Acapulco across the Pacific. The discoverer of this colony, (*) Ferdinand Magellan, died here during the Battle of Mactan. For ten points, name this Spanish colony where galleons brought silver to the port of Manila.
Answer: Philippines (or the Spanish East Indies)

4158. A film subtitled “A Prayer for Rain” chronicles a disaster in this country in which people suffered after exposure to methyl isocyanate [iso-cyan-ate]. This country’s court system charged CEO Warren Anderson for his role in that tragedy, which struck at a pesticide plant in 1984. For ten points, name this country where a gas leak at a Union Carbide facility in Bhopal killed thousands of people in Madhya Pradesh.
Answer: India (

4159. Isaac Newton’s quote “If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulder of giants” was probably a jab at this scientist’s short height. He wrote about his use of microscopes in his book Micrographia, and his namesake law can be stated as restoring force is proportional to displacement. For ten points, name this British scientist who coined the term “cell.”
Answer: Robert Hooke

4160. A revolution against this leader began after a boy was arrested for political graffiti in Daraa. To stop the Southern Front and Army of Conquest, this Ba’athist leader allegedly ordered his air force to use barrel bombs in an ongoing civil war. This leader brokered a ceasefire with Vladimir Putin shortly after recapturing Aleppo in December 2016. For ten points, name the current president of Syria.
Answer: Bashar al-Assad

4161. Before accomplishing this feat, one man uttered “Talitha kum;” he was delayed from performing this action by a continuously bleeding woman. On a different occasion, after waiting two extra days to perform this action, the same man’s emotional response is recorded in the shortest verse in the Bible. The phrase “Jesus wept” occurs immediately before an instance of, for ten points, what miracle that Jesus performed for Lazarus?
Answer: raising the dead (

4162. This man prompted a conflict by installing Guibert of Ravenna as Antipope Clement III. This man walked to Canossa Castle barefoot to beg forgiveness from Gregory VII after a dispute involving the pope’s authority to appoint bishops in the Lay Investiture controversy. For ten points, name this Holy Roman Emperor who shares his name and number with a French king who claimed Paris was worth a mass.
Answer: Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor (or Heinrich IV)

4163. Henry Raymond defended this business with a homemade Gatling gun during a draft riot. Along with the Washington Post, this company was targeted by the Nixon administration for publishing the Pentagon Papers, and it had earlier won a lawsuit brought against it by L.B. Sullivan. For ten points, name this “Gray Lady,” a newspaper whose motto is “All the News That’s Fit to Print” and is published in Manhattan.
Answer: The New York Times (or NYT

4164. The Negroli family, based in Milan, was a key producer of these objects. Decorated versions of these objects were worn at tilts, and Japanese objects of this type were made from overlapping leather scales. These objects included the hauberk and gauntlets, and Roman legionaries wore types of these made from mail or plates. For ten points, name these protective outfits that were used in jousting and medieval warfare.
Answer: suits of armor (

4165. In November 2015, this man released the multilingual rock album Wake Up! In December 2015, this man and Patriarch Kirill issued the Havana declaration, calling for the end of religious persecution in the Middle East. This man canonized two of his predecessors, John XXIII [23] and John Paul II, and his immediate predecessor, Benedict XVI [16], resigned. For ten points, name this current head of the Roman Catholic Church.
Answer: Pope Francis (or Jorge Bergoglio) Second Quarter

4166. This man gained the territories of Brittany and Normandy after the Treaty of Le Goulet with Philip II Augustus, but lost them after his defeat at the Battle of Bouvines. After this man tried to appoint an Archbishop of Canterbury, Innocent III excommunicated him. For ten points, name this brother of Richard the Lionheart who, after being confronted by English nobles at Runnymede, signed the Magna Carta.
Answer: King John (

4167. Two lions attack these animals in reliefs at the entrance to the Apadana of Darius and Xerxes. Four of the extinct ancestor of these animals, called aurochs, were painted using twisted perspective in a “Hall” of these animals. Several youths are shown ceremonially leaping over the horns of these animals on the walls of the Palace at Knossos on Crete. For ten points, name this bovine animal that provided the head for the mythical Minotaur.
Answer: bulls (

4168. This man decided not to contest an election after Estes Kefauver won the New Hampshire primary. This man used Turnip Day as an opportunity to attack the Republican majorities in the 80th Congress. This man, who ordered the integration of the armed forces, suffered in popularity later for his nationalization of the steel mills during the Korean War. For ten points, name this president who was not defeated by Dewey during the 1948 Presidential election.
Answer: Harry S Truman Page 2

4169. The oldest surviving example of this instrument is named after King Charles IX of France, who commissioned it in 1560. A difficult sonata for this instrument by Giuseppe Tartini is nicknamed “Devil’s Trill.” J.S. Bach wrote a set of sonatas and partitas as solos for this instrument, which was made in Cremona by families like Guarneri and Amati. For ten points, name this highest-pitched string instrument to be manufactured by Antonio Stradivari.
Answer: violin BONUS: This violin virtuoso, who legendarily sold his soul to the devil, composed a

4170. Gustave Courbet fled to Switzerland after advocating the destruction of the Vendome Column during this government’s tenure. Supporters of this government were shot at the Federalists’ Wall in Pere Lachaise [pair la-shez] during the Bloody Week, in which Marshal MacMahon restored control for Adolphe Thiers [tee-air]. For ten points, name this revolutionary socialist government, formed after the Franco-Prussian War in the French capital.
Answer: Paris Commune BONUS: Adolphe Theirs was the first president of this French government, which lasted until France’s defeat in the early stages of World War II. French Third Republic (

4171. This writer’s opposition to the collection of indemnities by William Ament after the Boxer Rebellion prompted him to write an essay “To the Person Sitting in Darkness.” This author of Roughing It also wrote about his early years as an apprentice to a steamboat captain in Life on the Mississippi, in which he explained the genesis of his pen name. For ten points, name this author, born Samuel Langhorne Clemens, famous for his Adventures of Tom Sawyer.
Answer: Mark Twain (

4172. One holder of this position expanded his capital city to include Janiculum Hill. Holders of this position repeatedly fought against Veii [way-ee] and destroyed the city of Alba Longa. The last holder of this position was overthrown by Lucius Junius Brutus after the Rape of Lucretia. Julius Caesar was assassinated because the conspirators thought he wanted to revive, for ten points, what position held by the first seven rulers of Rome?
Answer: King of Rome (

4173. This man invaded Honduras to defeat his rebellious lieutenant Cristobal the Old. This man was attacked by his rivals Diego Velazquez and Bishop Fonseca in the Council of the Indies. This man burned his ships after landing at modern Veracruz and allied with the people of Tlaxcala. He captured Montezuma II in his capital of Tenochtitlan and created the Viceroyalty of New Spain. For ten points, name this conquistador who conquered the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Hernan Cortes BONUS: Cortes implemented this system of forced labor in New Spain, where a number of natives were granted to conquistadors, who in return were supposed to protect them and convert them. encomienda Third Quarter The categories are ...

4174. River, along with the Euphrates, provided Mesopotamia with the sustenance required to produce artwork?
Answer: Tigris River

4175. Terrorist organization based in Raqqa has destroyed many ancient artworks?
Answer: ISIS (or Islamic

4176. Stepped pyramids were common in Mesopotamian cites?
Answer: ziggurats

4177. Wedge-shaped script, written using a stylus, was used to write on some Mesopotamian artworks?
Answer: cuneiform

4178. Legendary, part-god figure built the walls of Uruk, protecting the art in the White Temple?
Answer: Gilgamesh

4179. Civilization made sculptures of Lamassus, a creature with the head of a man and the body of a winged ox
Answer: Assyrian Page 4

4180. “Reformed” group of Calvinists that fought with the French crown during the Wars of Religion and were protected by the Edict of Nantes [nahnt].
Answer: Huguenots

4181. Capital city that the Protestant Henry IV declared was “well worth a mass” on converting to Catholicism.
Answer: Paris

4182. “Sun King” who revoked the Edict of Nantes in 1685.
Answer: Louis XIV [14] (

4183. 1572 massacre of French Protestants ordered by the Queen Mother.
Answer: St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre

4184. Dynasty that supported the Protestants through its cadet House of Conde. It was the last royal house of France.
Answer: House of Bourbon

4185. Cardinal who fought French Protestants while serving Louis XIII.
Answer: Richelieu (or Armand-Jean du Plessis) Genocide Name the...

4186. Genocide carried out by Nazi Germany against “undesirable” people.
Answer: Holocaust (or Shoah

4187. Polish concentration camp, which included an extermination camp at Birkenau, used during that genocide.
Answer: Auschwitz-Birkenau

4188. Dutch city where the International Criminal Court prosecutes perpetrators of genocide.
Answer: The Hague

4189. Ethnic group targeted by an Ottoman genocide during World War I, now denied by the Turkish government.
Answer: Armenian people

4190. Modern country that was the site of the Holodomor famine and is the site of Russian military intervention.
Answer: Ukraine

4191. Western region of Sudan, subject to fighting between the government and Janjaweed militias.
Answer: Darfur genocide Fourth Quarter

4192. This man’s expedition to aid China after a flood is documented by the book North to the Orient. This man, who proposed a neutrality pact with Germany and supported the (+) America First movement, had his son kidnapped by Bruno Hauptmann in the “Crime of the Century.” In 1927, this man won the Orteig Prize for his (*) journey from Roosevelt Field to Le Bourget Field. For ten points, name this American aviator who undertook the first non-stop solo trans-Atlantic flight.
Answer: Charles Lindbergh Page 5

4193. The concept of adiaphora, or actions outside the realm of morality, was first propounded by this school of thought. One proponent of this school of thought frequently encouraged himself to “Erase impressions!” and wrote his (+) Meditations while on a military campaign. (*) Zeno of Citium founded, for ten points, what school of Ancient Greek thought, followed by Marcus Aurelius, that stressed virtue and freedom from emotion?
Answer: Stoicism

4194. A legend about this battle notes that the losing king was saved by an angel who turned him to marble. The Hungarian Orban designed the Basilica and Dardanelles guns for use in this siege in an attempt to breach the (+) Theodosian Walls. The winning side in this battle used a series of greased logs to transport ships across the Golden Horn. (*) Mehmed II was victorious in, for ten points, what 1453 siege in which the Ottomans captured the capital of the Byzantine Empire, renaming it Istanbul?
Answer: 1453 Siege (or Battle, etc.) of Constantinople

4195. This country was harshly criticized by the EU after the appointees to its Constitutional Tribunal were abruptly changed by the newly-elected Law and (+) Justice Party in 2015. During October 2016, thousands of women in this country participated in the “Black Monday” protests against a proposed total (*) ban on abortion. For ten points, name this predominantly Catholic country of slightly under 40 million people led by Andrzej [andr-zhay] Duda from Warsaw.
Answer: Poland (or Polska)

4196. Attempts to mitigate this event were described by John Evelyn. Lord Mayor Thomas Bloodworth was lambasted for his slow response to this event, which began at the bakery of Thomas Farriner on (+) Pudding Lane, as described by the diary of Samuel Pepys [peeps]. St. Paul’s Cathedral was destroyed in this event, so (*) Christopher Wren was commissioned to redesign it and much of the city. For ten points, name this 1666 event that devastated England’s capital.
Answer: Great Fire of London

4197. One leader of this country packed the head of a rival in ice so that he could communicate with it. Black dogs in this country were hunted down after the disgraced Clement Barbot was thought to have transfigured; Barbot was later caught in person by the (+) Tonton Macoute police. In 2011, when former president Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to this poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, he was arrested on corruption charges upon his arrival in (*) Port-au- Prince. For ten points, name this nation that shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic.
Answer: Haiti

4198. One of these specific vehicles was the focal point of the Revolt of the Lashes; that vehicle triggered a competition between the ABC nations in South America and was named after Minas Gerais. A plan to obtain more of these objects was proposed by (+) Alfred von Tirpitz in Germany. Jacky Fisher proposed the creation of the first of these vehicles, which were limited in size by the Treaty of (*) Washington and which fought in the Battle of Jutland. For ten points, name this class of large, “all big-gun” ships that dominated the early 20th century, named for a British Royal Navy battleship.
Answer: dreadnoughts (

4199. This empire lost possession of Lombardy in the Treaty of Villafranca during the Italian Wars of Independence. Following (+) Francis I’s defeat at Austerlitz and the ensuing Treaty of Pressburg, the Holy Roman Empire was effectively reorganized as this empire. In 1867, this empire entered into the Ausgleich (*) dual-monarchy under Franz Joseph I. For ten points, name this empire that merged with Hungary in the 19th century.
Answer: Austrian Empire (do not

4200. This figure commissioned Richard Mique to build a hamlet retreat at Yvelines. At a meeting in Saint-Cloud, this figure attempted to pay Honore Mirabeau to save her reputation. This figure lost popularity after allegedly defrauding jewelers in the (+) Affair of the Diamond Necklace. She was further vilified for her Austrian descent and her lavish hairstyles, though this daughter of Maria Theresa probably never said (*) “Let them eat cake.” For ten points, name this wife of Louis XVI.
Answer: Marie Antoinette Josephe-Jeanne d’Autriche-Lorraine BONUS: In what modern North African nation did Stephen Decatur

4201. A statue of this man was replaced by one of Saint Peter, standing on top of a monument to this man decorated with reliefs culminating in the suicide of Decebalus. This man built a bridge over the Danube River in his most famous campaign. For ten points, name this second of the Five Good Emperors who commemorated his conquest of Dacia with a namesake column.
Answer: Trajan (or Caesar Nerva Trajanus Germanicus or Marcus Ulpius Nerva Trajanus Augustus; do not

4202. One side in this battle halted fire due to a miscommunication about the remaining ammunition; to maintain morale, that side informed its men that the pause was to have breakfast. The direction “you may fire when you are ready, Gridley” was given to begin this battle. In this battle, George Dewey’s U.S. fleet lost one sailor to heatstroke and sunk 8 Spanish ships. For ten points, name this May 1, 1898 battle of the Spanish-American War, fought in the harbor of the Philippine capital city.
Answer: Battle of Manila Bay (do not

4203. Antonio Taguba’s report from this country concluded that Brigadier General Janis Karpinski allowed torture to continue. That torture in this country was documented in pictures like Charles Graner and Lynnie England giving a thumbs up behind a naked human pyramid. For ten points, name this country where US military personnel torturing detainees of the Abu Ghraib prison complex in 2003, shortly after the US had captured Baghdad.
Answer: Iraq

4204. A character in this play claims that a sunburn could not make his face any worse looking. In this play, it is said that Arthur’s bosom is the destination of the dead Falstaff. At a charge at Harfleur, this play’s title character declares “Once more unto the breach,” and later uses the phrase “we few, we happy few, we band of brothers” to open the St. Crispin’s Day Speech. For ten points, name this Shakespeare history play about the British king who won the Battle of Agincourt.
Answer: Henry V (do not

4205. Louis-Antoine Beaunier received a royal commission to construct one of these structures to aid the mining industry in the Loire basin. The first of these structures in Paris started at the Gare du Nord. Saint-Etienne was an early center for these structures, which were financed by the Perriere brothers through the Credit Mobilier. In 1937, these systems were nationalized in France under the SNCF, which still runs them today. For ten points, name these structures, which link cities like Lyon and Paris.
Answer: French railways (or railroads)

4206. On this island, the ambush of the Four Four Bravo patrol prompted racial violence during Black July. Lourenco de Almeida established a Portuguese fort on this island to counter Jaffna influence. Thanks to the evangelizing of Mahinda, Ashoka’s son, Theravada Buddhism is prominent on this island, contrary to the neighboring mainland. For ten points, name this home island of the Sinhalese and Tamil ethnic groups, a country whose largest city is Colombo.
Answer: Sri Lanka (

4207. In a diary, this man recalled Captain Arthur Slatter helping to kill a charging foe “just thirteen paces from where we stood.” This man's son Kermit was one of hundreds of guides for an expedition that provided the Smithsonian Institution's new Museum of Natural History with 11 black rhinoceros and 17 lions; that 1909-1910 safari began shortly after this man declined to run for re-election. For ten points, name this adventurous U.S. President.
Answer: Theodore (or Teddy) Roosevelt

4208. A leader of an uprising of these people was slain while meeting with William Walworth at Smithfield. These people burned down the Savoy Palace in anger over John of Gaunt's poll tax. A group of these people killed Archbishop Simon Sudbury after the cleric John Ball incited them to storm the Tower of London. For ten points, name this group of people that, under Wat Tyler, rebelled in 1381 over their harsh treatment and high taxes, a rebellion that began the end of English serfdom.
Answer: peasants (or serfs or anything to do with the lower class in England

4209. This kingdom faced a religious uprising that was led by Beatriz Kimpa Vita and named for Saint Anthony. The first European to meet with this kingdom was Diogo Cao [cow] in 1482, after which its king took the name Joao. After a failed 1914 revolt, this kingdom’s monarchy was abolished and its land assimilated into the colony of Angola. For ten points, name this kingdom that converted to Christianity after meeting the Portuguese and which names a pair of countries in Central Africa whose capitals are Kinshasa and Brazzaville.
Answer: Kingdom of Kongo BONUS: The Kingdom of Kongo was discovered by Portuguese sailors who used these small ships on missions of exploration. They had lateen sails and were much smaller than galleons. caravels

4210. Near this city, Robert Abercromby led a counterattack and spiked a series of cannons, though that charge that was quickly defended. A siege of this city ended when Charles O’Hara presented his commander’s sword to Benjamin Lincoln, after Lincoln’s superior refused to accept the weapon. A popular account claims that an army leaving this city played the song “The World Turned Upside Down.” For ten points, name this Virginia city where Charles Cornwallis’s surrender marked the end of the Revolutionary War.
Answer: (Siege/Battle of) Yorktown BONUS: This leader of the French Expeditionary Force marched with George Washington from Newport to Yorktown prior to the siege. At the surrender, this man was first offered the sword by O’Hara. Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau (

4211. A city in this present-day country along the Irtysh River was the capital of the self-proclaimed Alash Autonomy. The Semipalatinsk nuclear test site is in this country, as is a location leased until 2050 by its northern neighbor where Sputnik I was launched. This home of the Baikonur Cosmodrome moved its capital from Almaty in 1997. Astana is now the capital of, for ten points, what former Soviet republic, the largest landlocked country in the world?
Answer: Republic of Kazakhstan Page 2

4212. This singer collaborated with Stevie Wonder on “Ebony and Ivory” and with Michael Jackson on 1983’s “Say Say Say.” In 1984, this man convinced Michael Jackson of the benefit of owning copyrights to songs; Jackson promptly outbid this man for his own catalog of songs. In January 2017, this man sued Sony Music Publishing in another attempt to gain ownership of “The Long and Winding Road” and “Yesterday,” songs on which he shares a writing credit with John Lennon. For ten points, name this bass guitarist for the Beatles.
Answer: (James) Paul McCartney BONUS: To avoid losing millions of pounds to tax, McCartney and the other Beatles founded this corporation, which published new Beatles material starting in

4213. Two answers required. A source of tension between these two countries was one’s use of the phrase “legitimate grievance” to describe the Chushi Gangdruk uprising in the other. These two countries, one of which no longer exists, fought a border war over the Ussuri River. One of these two countries provided half of the investment for the other’s first Five Year Plan. Richard Nixon visited one of these two countries in 1972 in part because of its rivalry with the other. For ten points, name these countries which “split” in the early 1960s, despite being the two largest Communist countries in the world.
Answer: People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union (

4214. This military force captured four Swedish frigates at Grengam, a success that allowed its country to sign the Treaty of Nystad the following year. In the 1780s, American John Paul Jones joined this military force. After this military force helped win the Great Northern War in the Baltic, it fought against Turkey in the Black Sea. Peter the Great's embassy taught him Western techniques for building, for ten points, what military force that sailed for the Tsars?
Answer: Imperial Russian Navy BONUS: On land, an alliance between Ivan Mazepa and Charles XII at this

4215. In the sixth edition of this work, its author added a new chapter to respond to the criticisms of George Jackson Mivart. Its author was motivated to publish following Alfred Russell Wallace’s paper containing similar ideas. This work doesn’t analyze the human race, which was later tackled by its author’s The Descent of Man. For ten points, name this book that introduced evolution by natural selection, the magnum opus of Charles Darwin.
Answer: On the Origin of Species BONUS: Advocates for Darwin’s work included this man, his “Bulldog,” who debated Samuel Wilberforce at Oxford in

4216. At the funeral of one leader of this country in 1996, a wife and a mistress famously stood side by side. This country’s political regime was reorganized in 1958 to strengthen the powers of the executive. During periods of cohabitation, a liberal leader of this country worked with Edouard Balladur and Jacques Chirac, a pair of Gaullist prime ministers. For ten points, name this country governed by Francois Mitterrand and Emmanuel Macron.
Answer: France (

4217. Sea east of Sweden on which the League conducted most of its trade.
Answer: Baltic Sea

4218. Capital city with a League trading post at the Steelyard until Elizabeth I ended its license.
Answer: London

4219. Kingdom that controlled Jutland and that fought the Hansa for trading rights under Valdemar IV.
Answer: Denmark

4220. 15th century conflict in England in which the League supported the Yorkist side
Answer: Wars of the Roses

4221. City that describes itself today as Free and Hanseatic, and is the 2nd largest in Germany by population
Answer: Hamburg

4222. City with the headquarters of the League in Schleswig-Holstein. It was Kiel.
Answer: Lübeck Page 4

4223. Country invaded on September 1, 1939, marking the beginning of the war.
Answer: Poland

4224. Country that faced the Blitz and employed the Royal Air Force.
Answer: United Kingdom (

4225. French line of fortifications that did not account for a blitzkrieg through the Ardennes.
Answer: Maginot line

4226. Small country where General Patton is now buried that was the site of much of the Battle of the Bulge.
Answer: Luxembourg

4227. 1940 evacuation of Allied troops by everything from naval vessels to fishing boats.
Answer: Dunkirk evacuation (

4228. Failed operation to “end the war by Christmas” that wanted to capture Nijmegan [ny-may-hen] Bridge.
Answer: Operation Market Garden (

4229. The region, north of England, that Idi Amin pretended to be the last king of.
Answer: Scotland

4230. Country whose independence was won by Jomo Kenyatta, who then led from Nairobi.
Answer: Kenya

4231. Longtime dictator of Libya who was killed in 2011.
Answer: Muammar al-Gaddafi (or al-Qaddafi)

4232. Country founded by freed American slaves and once led by war criminal Charles Taylor.
Answer: Liberia

4233. Country led by Emperor Haile Selassie, who defended it against Italy.
Answer: Ethiopia

4234. Country, known as the colonial Gold Coast, whose independence was won by Kwame Nkrumah.
Answer: Ghana Fourth Quarter

4235. Some modified Corinthian capitals at this city are shaped like elephants and winged cats. A theater in this city includes statues of Heracles and Aphrodite. A building located above (+) al- Siq at this site has a facade that includes a broken pediment as well as depictions of Isis-Tyche, as well as Castor and Pollux; that building, a tomb for King Aretas IV in this city, is more commonly known as the Treasury, or the Khazneh. (*) For ten points, name this Nabataean capital, a city carved out of rock in modern Jordan.
Answer: Petra

4236. In this battle, one side’s failure to seize the Causeway Heights led to a prompt counterattack from James Scarlett in the South Valley. Colin Campbell’s 93rd Highlander regiment was dubbed the (+) “Thin Red Line” for their resoluteness in this battle. Lord Raglan ordered the Earl of Cardigan’s cavalry to attack the wrong set of Russian batteries in this battle; Page 5IHBB Asian Championships Bowl 2016-2017 Bowl Round 7 that disaster was recounted in a (*) poem by Alfred, Lord Tennyson. For ten points, name this battle, part of the Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War, which featured the Charge of the Light Brigade.
Answer: Battle of Balaclava (

4237. A crime is committed on this holiday in the Hercule Poirot story “Murder in the Mews.” The namesake of this holiday is idolized as an ancestor of the central family of the novel Martin Chuzzlewit. Evey [ee-vee] (+) Hammond is saved from assault on this holiday in a graphic novel by Alan Moore; a year later, she sets a subway train full of explosives to blow up a government building. The title character of (*) V for Vendetta wears a mask representing the namesake of, for ten points, what British holiday, the subject of the rhyme “Remember, remember, the fifth of November?”
Answer: Guy Fawkes Day and/or Night (

4238. This campaign was reinforced by Eurymedon and Demosthenes, though their men failed to breach the Epipolae walls. A lunar eclipse convinced one side to linger in a harbor during this event, leaving them exposed to attack from (+) Gylippus. The destruction of the Hermai statues shortly before this campaign led to the recall of one of its leaders, Alcibiades [al-sih-by-ah-deez]. (*) For ten points, name this disastrous campaign of the Peloponnesian War in which Athens tried to invade a large Mediterranean island.
Answer: Sicilian (or Sicily) Campaign or Expedition

4239. The subject of one of this artist’s paintings wears a medallion given to him by Alexander the Great while resting his hand on a bust of an ancient poet. This artist’s numerous self- portraits include one etching with his wife, (+) Saskia. He included a young girl in a yellow dress with a chicken hanging from her belt in his portrait of arquebusiers under the command of (*) Frans Banning Cocq. For ten points, name this Dutch artist of “The Anatomy Lesson” of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp and “The Night Watch”.
Answer: Rembrandt van Rijn

4240. This man gave a press conference that opened with John Quinn quoting Ben Franklin’s “A republic, sir, if you can keep it” anecdote. Later in the press conference, this man discussed a tax deduction for giving his (+) Vice Presidential papers to the government and misspoke, suggesting that John Ehrlichman was guilty until proven innocent. The press conference climaxed with this man explaining “I have earned everything I have got” after noting that “people have got to know whether or not their (*) President is a crook.” For ten points, name this President who was grilled by newspaper editors in 1973 over the Watergate scandal.
Answer: Richard Nixon

4241. During this battle, Simon Bolivar Buckner was killed by an explosion that sent coral into his body. Underage children were drafted into the Iron and Blood Imperial Corps in preparation for this battle. The battleship (+) Yamato was sunk in this battle, which was nicknamed the “typhoon of steel” due to the heavy incidence of kamikaze attacks. During this battle, one side launched Operation Iceberg in an attempt to gain a (*) base of operations for the invasion of the Japanese mainland. For ten points, name this 1945 battle in the Ryukyu Islands in the conclusion of the Allied island hopping campaign.
Answer: Battle of Okinawa Page 6

4242. Voters from this country repeatedly rejected the Annan Plans of reunification. Nikos Sampson was placed in power in this country by the EOKA attempting to fulfill the idea of (+) enosis. Operation Attila was an attack on this country following the overthrow of Archbishop Makarios, and fighting in this country led to the creation of the Green Line and a UN buffer zone. (*) For ten points, name this Mediterranean island country divided into zones dominated by Greek and Turkish partisans.
Answer: Cyprus

4243. One instance of this action was caused when someone threw a brick at a crowd led by Jan Zelivsky; Wenceslaus IV died of shock after hearing about that event. In another instance of this action, Vilem Slavata and Jaroslav Martinitz were (+) saved, according to enemy Protestants, by a pile of horse manure; that instance of this action occurred after the violation of the Letter of Majesty, which helped start the (*) Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this violent action that took place in 1419 and 1618 in Prague.
Answer: (First and/or Second) defenestrations of Prague (

4244. A participant in this event carried a piece of wood from the Wright Brothers’ first plane with him. William Safire wrote the “Fate has ordained” speech in case this event didn’t go as planned. The command module Columbia was piloted by Michael Collins during this event, which an estimated 600 million people watched live on July 20, 1969. For the point, name this “giant leap for mankind,” a NASA mission in which Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong became the first men to walk on the moon.
Answer: Apollo 11 (

4245. These people made the design of their pa forts more effective after a series of civil wars was triggered by the British introduction of muskets. William Hobson believed he had been appointed governor after these people signed the ambiguously-worded Treaty of Waitangi. For the point, name these indigenous people of New Zealand.
Answer: Maori people (

4246. This country’s parliament primarily consists of the March 8 and March 14 coalitions. A 29- month political deadlock in this country was ended with the October 2016 election of President Michel Aoun. In recent years, around one quarter of this country’s population has been Syrians fleeing a neighboring civil war. For the point, name this Levantine Arab country with a significant Maronite population with its capital at Beirut.
Answer: Lebanon

4247. The Florentine Codex describes Tlalocan, one of these places ruled by Chalchiuhtlicue [chall- wee-tl’ee-koh] and Tlaloc, as a region characterized by water. Hun-Came, the owner of a ball court, rules one of these places, another of which is called Yomi in Shinto traditions. The Isles of the Blessed comprise one of these, along with the Asphodel Fields and Elysium, in Greek mythology. For the point, name these spiritual places ruled by gods like Osiris and Hades, the home of spirits of the dead.
Answer: mythical underworlds (

4248. This country’s city of Penang was the capital of the Straits Settlements. This country’s capital is home to a pair of twin towers that were the tallest in the world from 1998 to 2004. It was formed from the union of Sarawak, North Borneo, and a namesake peninsula. In 1965, Singapore was kicked out of, for the point, what Southeast Asian nation whose Petronas Towers are in Kuala Lumpur?
Answer: Malaysia Page 1

4249. In this battle, William Prescott withdrew his men to Cambridge after running out of ammunition. General Thomas Gage was dismissed after this battle, in which Israel Putnam allegedly ordered his militia to not fire “until you see the whites of their eyes.” For the point, name this early battle of the Revolutionary War that predominantly took place on Breed’s Hill.
Answer: Battle of Bunker Hill (

4250. This leader instructed his troops to envelop enemies while attacking in a “buffalo horns” formation and introduced the tactic of offensive shield hooking while using a shorter, stabbing spear called the iklwa. Dingane [din-gah-nay] helped assassinate this chieftain in 1828. For the point, name this early leader of the Zulu kingdom.
Answer: Shaka Zulu (or Shaka kaSenzangakhona)

4251. This country was the site of a 1988 attempted coup led by Abdullah Luthufi that included the aid of foreign Tamil mercenaries. As a result of that attack, former prime minister of Ibrahim Nasir was accused of plotting against the government but eventually pardoned by longtime president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. The Kaafu Atoll is located in, for the point, what smallest Asian country by area, a series of islands in the Indian Ocean ruled from Malé?
Answer: Maldives (9) The Gellert Hill overlooks this city and served as an important vantage point during a 100 day siege in World War II. The Chain bridge and Arpad bridge are located in this city, whose Heroes’ Square is the resting place of Imre Nagy [nahj], the leader of an anti-Soviet

4252. In an attempt to avoid enriching his country’s mafia and bureaucrats, this leader implemented a voucher system to sell state-run enterprises, but most people sold their vouchers off. This man agreed to the Belavezha Accords, establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States. In 1991, this man stood on top of a tank to denounce a revolt led by the KGB, shortly before he replaced Mikhail Gorbachev in power. For the point, name this first post-Soviet President of Russia.
Answer: Boris Yeltsin

4253. Despite having won at this war’s battles of Dessau Bridge and Wolgast, Albrecht von Wallenstein was accused of treason and assassinated. One year after Count Tilly was routed at Breitenfeld in this war, an ill-fated cavalry charge at Lutzen led to the death of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden. The Treaty of Westphalia ended, for the point, what religious war in Europe that lasted from 1618 to 1648?
Answer: Thirty Years’ War Page 2

4254. During this type of event, “Soapy” Smith was killed in a shootout between two rival gangs. One of these events caused the expansion of the towns of Dyea [dye-EE], Skagway, and Dawson City, and another of these events began on the American River with a discovery on Sutter’s Mill. For the point, name these crazes where prospectors flocked to the Klondike or to California in search of a precious metal.
Answer: gold rushes (

4255. This man was implicated after a letter was found in ambassador Max von Schwartzkoppen’s garbage. Georges Picquart was sent to North Africa for supporting this man. The crimes of Ferdinand Esterhazy were blamed on this man, who was imprisoned on Devil’s Island. Emile Zola penned the open letter J’accuse in defense of, for the point, what Jewish army officer who was accused of treason in 19th century France, triggering a namesake affair?
Answer: Alfred Dreyfus (

4256. An omen in this poem involves the main character’s father’s head bursting into flame. The ghost of Creusa advises a man in this poem, which begins with the invocation “I sing of arms and the man...” This poem’s main character battles Turnus and spurns the love of Dido on his journey from Troy to establish the city of Rome. For the point, name this epic poem by Virgil.
Answer: (the) Aeneid

4257. One member of this religious group was the first to publish a grammar of the Coptic language and is considered the “founder of Egyptology.” Athanasius Kircher was a member of this group, which also included one of the judges who agreed to the sentencing of Giordano Bruno to death in 1600; that theologian argued against heliocentrism at the trial of Galileo. Cardinal Robert Bellarmine was a member of, for the point, what Catholic congregation founded by Ignatius of Loyola?
Answer: Society of Jesus (

4258. The Case-Church amendment ended American support for this country. A massacre in this country at Hue [who-ay] sparked a civil resistance movement led by Buddhist monks. In 1963, this country’s Catholic leader, Ngo Dinh Diem [no-din-yeam], was assassinated. For the point, name this nation that was conquered by its communist northern neighbor shortly after the U.S. withdrew from Saigon.
Answer: South Vietnam (or the Republic of Vietnam

4259. The losing commander at this battle observed his forces from a throne on Mount Aigaleo. The winning side of this battle had moved ships to the Saronic Gulf after learning of Sparta’s defeat at Thermopylae, leaving Athens undefended. For the point, name this 480 BC naval battle, a victory for Themistocles and the Greeks over Xerxes I, a turning point of the Persian Wars.
Answer: Battle of Salamis Page 3

4260. A 2016 presidential election in this country was redone because 77,000 absentee votes were counted too early. In that election, Green candidate Alexander Van der Bellen eventually defeated far- right FPO candidate Norbert Hofer. For the point, name this country, led until 2016 by Heinz Fischer from Vienna.
Answer: Austria (or Osterreich)

4261. Though his country was officially neutral in World War II, this man dispatched the Blue Division to fight against the Soviet Union. The reputation of this man grew after serving as head of the Foreign Legion in the Rif War. This man merged the Carlist and Falange parties and requested the German Condor Legion’s bombing of Guernica in his country’s civil war. For the point, name this Spanish fascist dictator.
Answer: Francisco Franco

4262. A portrait of this woman as a princess was created by Levina Teerling, who worked in the court of this queen’s father alongside Hans Holbein. Another portrait of this woman with her hand resting on a globe shows a naval battle that ended with the 1588 defeat of the Spanish Armada. For the point, name this daughter of Henry VIII, the “Virgin” Queen of England.
Answer: Elizabeth I or Elizabeth Tudor (

4263. A military engineer from this country served under Nathanael Greene at the Battle of Guilford Court House. Another military figure from this country died leading the siege of Savannah, is called the “father of the American cavalry,” and is honored with a holiday in early March in Chicago. Those two commanders from this country aided the American Revolution after gaining experience fighting against Russia. For the point, name this European country where Tadeusz Kosciuezko [tah-dah-oosh koh-shoo- skow] and Casimir Pulaski fought against partitions.
Answer: Poland

4264. A group based in this city won the War of the Two Capitals when it was known as Khanbaliq. The Summer Palace was built in this city by the Jin Dynasty. This city became the northern terminus of the Grand Canal in the 7th century. The Yongle Emperor moved his capital here, and his son failed to move the capital back to Nanjing. The site of the Forbidden Palace is, for the point, what modern capital of China?
Answer: Beijing (or Peking

4265. This man's troops committed atrocities at Drogheda [DRAW-duh] and Wexford during his campaigns in Ireland. This man appointed the Barebones Parliament and dismissed the Rump Parliament. After the passage of the Self-denying Ordinance, he served as the cavalry commander in the New Model Army and supported the execution of Charles I. For the point, name this Lord Protector who came to power during the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell Page 4

4266. Auxiliary forces in this empire were grouped into alae [al-ee] and recruited from regional allies called socii [soke-ee-ee]. Its cavalry traditionally drew from the equites [ek-wee-tays] class and it separated its heavy infantry into hastati, principes [prin-key-pays], and triarii. Later fighting forces of this empire were comprised of ten cohorts and carried an eagle standard. For the point, name this ancient empire whose basic fighting unit, called a legion, defended the Italian peninsula.
Answer: Rome (

4267. Lawrence Oates died in this region after remarking "I am just going outside and may be some time;" that self-sacrifice was in vain, as the rest of the Terra Nova Expedition could not reach a one-ton depot of supplies. That 1912 expedition to explore this landmass ended with Robert Scott's death as his party returned from ninety degrees south latitude. For the point, name this southernmost continent.
Answer: Antarctica

4268. A participant in this event carried a piece of wood from the Wright Brothers’ first plane with him. William Safire wrote the “Fate has ordained” speech in case this event didn’t go as planned. The command module Columbia was piloted by Michael Collins during this event, which an estimated 600 million people watched live on July 20, 1969. For the point, name this “giant leap for mankind,” a NASA mission in which Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong became the first men to walk on the moon.
Answer: Apollo 11 (

4269. After Henry Menzies was appointed to collect a dog tax from these people, they were led into rebellion by Hone Toia. These people made the design of their pa forts more effective after a series of civil wars was triggered by the British introduction of muskets. William Hobson believed he had been appointed governor after these people signed the ambiguously-worded Treaty of Waitangi. For the point, name these indigenous people of New Zealand.
Answer: Maori people (

4270. Armed clashes that broke out in this country’s capital city were ended by a 2008 agreement signed in Qatar’s capital, Doha. This country’s parliament primarily consists of the March 8 and March 14 coalitions. A 29-month political deadlock in this country was ended with the October 2016 election of President Michel Aoun. In recent years, around one quarter of this country’s population has been Syrians fleeing a neighboring civil war. For the point, name this Levantine Arab country with a significant Maronite population with its capital at Beirut.
Answer: Lebanon

4271. Avici is one of these places situated in Naraka in Buddhism. The Florentine Codex describes Tlalocan, one of these places ruled by Chalchiuhtlicue [chall-wee-tl’ee-koh] and Tlaloc, as a region characterized by water. Hun-Came, the owner of a ball court, rules one of these places, another of which is called Yomi in Shinto traditions. The Isles of the Blessed comprise one of these, along with the Asphodel Fields and Elysium, in Greek mythology. For the point, name these spiritual places ruled by gods like Osiris and Hades, the home of spirits of the dead.
Answer: mythical underworlds (

4272. Affirmative action programs in this country favor native residents known as “bumiputeras.” This country’s city of Penang was the capital of the Straits Settlements. This country’s capital is home to a pair of twin towers that were the tallest in the world from 1998 to 2004. It was formed from the union of Sarawak, North Borneo, and a namesake peninsula. In 1965, Singapore was kicked out of, for the point, what Southeast Asian nation whose Petronas Towers are in Kuala Lumpur?
Answer: Malaysia Page 1

4273. A bombardment before this battle was halted by Samuel Graves when the Lively’s guns woke him up from his sleep. In this battle, William Prescott withdrew his men to Cambridge after running out of ammunition. General Thomas Gage was dismissed after this battle, in which Israel Putnam allegedly ordered his militia to not fire “until you see the whites of their eyes.” For the point, name this early battle of the Revolutionary War that predominantly took place on Breed’s Hill.
Answer: Battle of Bunker Hill (

4274. This country began to clear out slum areas in 2005 in Operation Drive Out the Rubbish, years after launching “Fast Track Reforms” that seized land from minority white populations. This country gained its independence after the Bush War and the signing of the Lancaster House Accords with Great Britain. Morgan Tsvangirai’s [chong-ghee-rai’s] Movement for Democratic Change currently opposes this country’s ruling party, ZANU-PF. For the point, name this African country currently led by Robert Mugabe.
Answer: Zimbabwe

4275. This battle was prompted by Pope Pius V’s pleas to rescue Famagusta. Sebastiano Venier, a future Doge of Venice, rose to prominence after serving in the centre division of this battle alongside the flagship Real, a galley. The author of Don Quixote, Miguel de Cervantes, was wounded in this battle while fighting against the forces of Ali Pasha. For the point, name this 1571 battle in which Don Juan of Austria led the Holy League to victory over the Ottoman fleet.
Answer: Battle of Lepanto

4276. This man instructed his warriors to sing an enemy victory chant to lure out his opponent’s defenses in the final defeat of his rival, Zwide [zwee-day]. This leader instructed his troops to envelop enemies while attacking in a “buffalo horns” formation and introduced the tactic of offensive shield hooking while using a shorter, stabbing spear called the iklwa. Dingane [din-gah-nay] helped assassinate this chieftain in 1828. For the point, name this early leader of the Zulu kingdom.
Answer: Shaka Zulu (or Shaka kaSenzangakhona)

4277. This country was the site of a 1988 attempted coup led by Abdullah Luthufi that included the aid of foreign Tamil mercenaries. As a result of that attack, former prime minister of Ibrahim Nasir was accused of plotting against the government but eventually pardoned by longtime president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. The Kaafu Atoll is located in, for the point, what smallest Asian country by area, a series of islands in the Indian Ocean ruled from Malé?
Answer: Maldives (11) This city contains the islands of Margaret, Csepel [cheh-pell], and Obudai, the last of which holds the massive Sziget [sih-get] music festival every August. The Gellert Hill overlooks this city and served as an important vantage point during a 100 day siege in World War II. The Chain bridge and Arpad bridge are located in this city, whose Heroes’ Square is the resting place of Imre Nagy [nahj], the leader of an anti-Soviet

4278. Members of this group styling themselves the “Knights of Mary Phagan” kidnapped and lynched Leo Frank. This group, which held a large rally near the 1924 Democratic National Convention, was revitalized by William Simmons during a meeting at Stone Mountain. D.W. Griffith’s The Birth of a Nation glorified, for the point, what American white supremacist group, led by Grand Wizards who wear white hoods?
Answer: Ku Klux Klan (or KKK)

4279. Yegor Ligachev’s insults prompted this man to write a resignation letter; well after, Ligachev famously noted that this man “was wrong.” In an attempt to avoid enriching his country’s mafia and bureaucrats, this leader implemented a voucher system to sell state-run enterprises, but most people sold their vouchers off. This man agreed to the Belavezha Accords, establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States. In 1991, this man stood on top of a tank to denounce a revolt led by the KGB, shortly before he replaced Mikhail Gorbachev in power. For the point, name this first post-Soviet President of Russia.
Answer: Boris Yeltsin

4280. One side in this conflict received funding from France after the Treaty of Barwalde. Despite having won at this war’s battles of Dessau Bridge and Wolgast, Albrecht von Wallenstein was accused of treason and assassinated. One year after Count Tilly was routed at Breitenfeld in this war, an ill-fated cavalry charge at Lutzen led to the death of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden. The Treaty of Westphalia ended, for the point, what religious war in Europe that lasted from 1618 to 1648?
Answer: Thirty Years’ War

4281. The Greek ambassador Megasthenes described how this man never slept in one room for two consecutive nights. His advisor, Kautilya, wrote a text on politics, often compared to The Prince, called the Arthashastra. This ruler reconquered land from Seleucus I, who had come to rule the eastern territories of Alexander the Great, and he defeated the Nanda Empire to conquer most of India. For the point, name this founder of the Mauryan Empire and grandfather of Ashoka.
Answer: Chandragupta Maurya

4282. During this type of event, “Soapy” Smith was killed in a shootout between two rival gangs. One of these events caused the expansion of the towns of Dyea [dye-EE], Skagway, and Dawson City, and another of these events began on the American River with a discovery on Sutter’s Mill. For the point, name these crazes where prospectors flocked to the Klondike or to California in search of a precious metal.
Answer: gold rushes (

4283. This man was implicated after a letter was found in ambassador Max von Schwartzkoppen’s garbage. Georges Picquart was sent to North Africa for supporting this man. The crimes of Ferdinand Esterhazy were blamed on this man, who was imprisoned on Devil’s Island. Emile Zola penned the open letter J’accuse in defense of, for the point, what Jewish army officer who was accused of treason in 19th century France, triggering a namesake affair?
Answer: Alfred Dreyfus (

4284. John Adams’s diary contains an anecdote about this poem whereby a boy mistranslated the word “sing” as “dog.” An omen in this poem involves the main character’s father’s head bursting into flame. The ghost of Creusa advises a man in this poem, which begins with the invocation “I sing of arms and the man...” This poem’s main character battles Turnus and spurns the love of Dido on his journey from Troy to establish the city of Rome. For the point, name this epic poem by Virgil.
Answer: (the) Aeneid

4285. One member of this group reformed Alyosius Lilius’s Gregorian calendar. Another member of this group was the first to publish a grammar of the Coptic language and is considered the “founder of Egyptology.” Athanasius Kircher was a member of this group, which also included one of the judges who agreed to the sentencing of Giordano Bruno to death in 1600; that theologian argued against heliocentrism at the trial of Galileo. Cardinal Robert Bellarmine was a member of, for the point, what Catholic congregation founded by Ignatius of Loyola?
Answer: Society of Jesus (

4286. In this country, political appointees were required to join the Can Lao party. The Case-Church amendment ended American support for this country. A massacre in this country at Hue [who-ay] sparked a civil resistance movement led by Buddhist monks. In 1963, this country’s Catholic leader, Ngo Dinh Diem [no-din-yeam], was assassinated. For the point, name this nation that was conquered by its communist northern neighbor shortly after the U.S. withdrew from Saigon.
Answer: South Vietnam (or the Republic of Vietnam

4287. The spy Sicinnus enticed the evenutal losers of this battle to press the attack, despite Artemisia’s preference to fight on land. The losing commander at this battle observed his forces from a throne on Mount Aigaleo. The winning side of this battle had moved ships to the Saronic Gulf after learning of Sparta’s defeat at Thermopylae, leaving Athens undefended. For the point, name this 480 BC naval battle, a victory for Themistocles and the Greeks over Xerxes I, a turning point of the Persian Wars.
Answer: Battle of Salamis

4288. In 2000 several European Union countries imposed sanctions on this country after the OVP entered a coalition government with Jorg Haider’s political party. A 2016 presidential election in this country was redone because 77,000 absentee votes were counted too early. In that election, Green candidate Alexander Van der Bellen eventually defeated far-right FPO candidate Norbert Hofer. For the point, name this country, led until 2016 by Heinz Fischer from Vienna.
Answer: Austria (or Osterreich) Page 4

4289. A photo taken in the aftermath of this event shows a helicopter flying over a line of buses in front of a highway sign featuring the word “Mandeville.” Plaquemines [plak-uh-meen] Parish suffered extreme damage in this event, in which the 17th Street Canal levee broke. Mayor Ray Nagin controversially argued that “God wanted” a “chocolate” New Orleans to be rebuilt after, for the point, what 2005 hurricane?
Answer: Hurricane Katrina

4290. This man ordered troops to besiege Sidi Ifni after a series of rebellions broke out in the Forgotten War. Though his country was officially neutral in World War II, he dispatched the Blue Division to fight against the Soviet Union. The reputation of this man grew after serving as head of the Foreign Legion in the Rif War. This man merged the Carlist and Falange parties and requested the German Condor Legion’s bombing of Guernica in his country’s civil war. For the point, name this Spanish fascist dictator.
Answer: Francisco Franco

4291. This monarch employed the jeweler Nicholas Hilliard, who created the Phoenix portrait of her. A portrait of this woman as a princess was created by Levina Teerling, who worked in the court of this queen’s father alongside Hans Holbein. Another portrait of this woman with her hand resting on a globe shows a naval battle that ended with the 1588 defeat of the Spanish Armada. For the point, name this daughter of Henry VIII, the “Virgin” Queen of England.
Answer: Elizabeth I or Elizabeth Tudor (

4292. A military engineer from this country served under Nathanael Greene at the Battle of Guilford Court House. Another military figure from this country died leading the siege of Savannah, is called the “father of the American cavalry,” and is honored with a holiday in early March in Chicago. Those two commanders from this country aided the American Revolution after gaining experience fighting against Russia. For the point, name this European country where Tadeusz Kosciuezko [tah-dah-oosh koh-shoo- skow] and Casimir Pulaski fought against partitions.
Answer: Poland

4293. This city was rebuilt with a pavilion called the Drum Tower at its center. A group based in this city won the War of the Two Capitals when it was known as Khanbaliq. The Summer Palace was built in this city by the Jin Dynasty. This city became the northern terminus of the Grand Canal in the 7th century. The Yongle Emperor moved his capital here, and his son failed to move the capital back to Nanjing. The site of the Forbidden Palace is, for the point, what modern capital of China?
Answer: Beijing (or Peking

4294. This man faced a rebellion by the Sealed Knot movement, led by John Penruddock. His troops committed atrocities at Drogheda [DRAW-duh] and Wexford during his campaigns in Ireland. This man appointed the Barebones Parliament and dismissed the Rump Parliament. After the passage of the Self- denying Ordinance, he served as the cavalry commander in the New Model Army and supported the execution of Charles I. For the point, name this Lord Protector who came to power during the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell

4295. Lawrence Oates died in this region after remarking "I am just going outside and may be some time;" that self-sacrifice was in vain, as the rest of the Terra Nova Expedition could not reach a one-ton depot of supplies. That 1912 expedition to explore this landmass ended with Robert Scott's death as his party returned from ninety degrees south latitude. For the point, name this southernmost continent.
Answer: Antarctica (30) This empire adopted a border defense force called the limantei. Auxiliary forces in this empire were grouped into alae [al-ee] and recruited from

4296. Note: Three answers required. The Voice Dialogue method is a way of engaging one of these three things to bring it in harmony with the other two. James Strachey’s translation of these concepts has been criticized by Bruno Bettelheim. One of these three concepts is weaker in women because they do not identify with the father as much as men do with their mothers; that concept was explored in a book titled for two of these concepts, written by their formulator. Instinct, realism, and morality are modeled by, for the point, what three psychological concepts that theoretically make up the mind according to Sigmund Freud?
Answer: id, ego, and superego (must have all 3; any order is fine; prompt if fewer than 3 are given) Page 6

4297. One of these objects was smuggled to Venice from Alexandria in a crate of rotting pork and cabbages. In an 897 synod, Pope Stephen VI put one of these objects, belonging to Pope Formosus, on trial. Another of these objects, belonging to Vladimir Lenin, remains on display in Moscow in his mausoleum. For the point, name these things, which are usually placed in graves.
Answer: dead bodies (

4298. In the 1950s, the British carried out this tactic via 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid in Malaya during the Emergency. Even though that use was largely ineffective, it encouraged the United States to perform this tactic, causing dioxin poisoning in Vietnam. Agent Orange is a chemical used for this process, which threatens oranguatan habitats in Indonesia for the sake of palm oil production. "Slash and burn" is a common method of, for the point, what environmentally dangerous action that, controversially, creates farmland in the Amazon?
Answer: deforestation (

4299. One side in this battle had been called to aid Odo the Great after he had suffered heavy losses at Toulouse and Bordeaux. This battle was lost by an unsuccessful uphill cavalry charge ordered by Abd ar-Rahman, and the winner of this battle was granted the nickname “the hammer.” For the point, name this battle in which Charles Martel halted the Muslim invasion of Western Europe.
Answer: Battle of Tours (or Battle of Poitiers)

4300. This man heavily increased a land tax to fund welfare programs in his “People’s Budget,” and this leader’s foreign minister advocated for the “establishment...of a national home of the Jewish people” in the Balfour Declaration. For the point, name this Welsh prime minister who led Britain through World War I.
Answer: David Lloyd George (

4301. Improvements to this effort were made after Black Friday by its new commander, William Tunner. This effort led to the creation of a new runway at Tempelhof Airport and it included morale- boosting candy drops to children, called Operation Little Vittles. This event used C-54 transports to carry coal and food. For the point, name this 1948-49 effort to supply an Allied city that had been cut off by Soviets in East Germany.
Answer: Berlin Airlift (

4302. This country paid families in the U.S. $80,000 as negotiated by Caleb Cushing, after troops from this country executed people on board the Virginius. The unknown source of the Arkansas River shifted a boundary that had been defined in an 1819 treaty between the U.S. and this country; that treaty was negotiated by John Quincy Adams and Luis de Onis. For the point, name this European country that fought an 1898 war against the U.S. after the explosion of the Maine.
Answer: Spain

4303. This city, the site of the Translation Movement, was founded by al-Mansur after his brother’s victory at the Battle of Zab. Harun al-Rashid constructed the House of Wisdom in this city, which was brutally sacked by Hulagu Khan as the Tigris ran "black with ink" and "red with blood." For the point, name this center of Islamic learning and culture, the capital of both the Abbasid Caliphate and modern Iraq.
Answer: Baghdad

4304. A stray vine prevented the escape of this man’s assassin, Pausanias. This man was given the one- word reply “If” after issuing a series of threats to Sparta. This man created the League of Corinth to oppose Persia shortly after he defeated Thebes’s Sacred Band at Chaeronea. For the point, name this Macedonian ruler and father of Alexander the Great.
Answer: Philip II of Macedon

4305. A holder of this position enforced peace among his vassals by passing the Ewiger Landfriede [eh-vig-er land-free-deh]. This title was created for a man who rescued John XII and had previously won the Battle of Lechfeld. According to the Golden Bull of 1356, seven electors chose the next holder of this position, which was dominated by the Habsburgs for 400 years. For the point, name this position, the ruler of a loose confederation of Germanic states.
Answer: Holy Roman Emperor

4306. A successful example of this type of business was founded in Philadelphia by Stephen Girard in 1811 after the “First” of these “of the US” had its charter expire. The “Pet” and “Wildcat” varieties of these businesses were active in the 1830s after Andrew Jackson effectively killed the United States’s second national one. For the point, name these businesses, modern examples of which include Wells Fargo and JPMorgan Chase, which are responsible for storing and lending money.
Answer: banks Page 2

4307. The London Protocol ended this conflict shortly after Edward Codrington outmaneuvered Ibrahim Pasha at the Battle of Navarino. Alexander Ypsilantis led one side in this conflict, which was depicted by Eugene Delacroix in his Massacre at Chios and Ruins of Missolonghi. Lord Byron died fighting in, for the point, what 1820s war in which the First Hellenic Republic broke away from the Ottoman Empire?
Answer: Greek War of Independence

4308. A king refused to authorize Luigi Facta’s use of force to stop this event, which led to the following year’s Acerbo [ah-chair-boh] Law granting one party a parliamentary majority. Michele [mee- KAY-leh] Bianchi and Cesare [CHAY-sar-ay] Vecchi organized this event, which prompted Victor Emmanuel III to transfer power to the leader of the Blackshirts. For the point, name this event in which Benito Mussolini seized power after his men entered the capital city of Italy.
Answer: March on Rome (

4309. This composition's third movement borrows a theme from Mozart’s Symphony no. 40, and was premiered in an 1808 concert along with the next piece of its type by the same composer. A theme from this work was used in the “V for Victory” campaign during World War II and has been described as “fate knocking at the door.” For the point, name this Ludwig van Beethoven symphony in C minor, famous for its short-short-short-long opening motif.
Answer: Ludwig van Beethoven’s Symphony no. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (”Beethoven” and “Symphony” not needed after mention)

4310. A member of this class wrote The Book of the Five Rings, which advises against stylish flourishes. The importance of this class was lessened by the introduction of the arquebus, which shifted focus to the lightly armored Ashigaru. After the Ako Incident, 47 members of this class, which were relabeled Ronin due to the death of their master, killed the offending court official. The bushido code is often attributed to, for the point, what class of Japanese warriors that are commonly depicted wielding katanas?
Answer: samurai (

4311. The Phoenix Project helped repair this facility after Hani Hanjour and four others hijacked American Airlines Flight 77 and crashed it into this structure, which includes over six million feet of floor space in a building only five floors high. For the point, name this Arlington County, Virginia facility that houses the Department of Defense and is named for its shape.
Answer: the Pentagon Page 3

4312. This ruler was unable to secure the submission of the Duchy of Benevento when he subjugated the Lombard kingdom. Alcuin was a notable philosopher during this man’s reign, which was chronicled by his biographer Einhard. His defeat at Roncevaux Pass inspired The Song of Roland. For the point, name this Carolingian king who was crowned by Leo III on Christmas Day 800 as the first Holy Roman Emperor.
Answer: Charlemagne (

4313. This man described his experiences, including his victory at the Battle of Tafileh that earned him a Distinguished Cross, in Seven Pillars of Wisdom. This man’s promises of an Arab homeland were violated by the Sykes-Picot Treaty. For the point, name this British soldier who fought the Ottoman Empire in the Middle East during World War I.
Answer: Thomas Edward Lawrence (or Lawrence of Arabia)

4314. This man wrote The Revolution Betrayed while living in exile with Diego Rivera. As Commissar of Foreign Affairs, this man handed the Baltic States to Kaiser Wilhelm II by signing the Treaty of Brest- Litovsk. Years after he founded the Red Army, this man was killed in Mexico by an ice pick to the head. For the point, name this Soviet politician who lost a power struggle with Joseph Stalin.
Answer: Leon Trotsky

4315. A commander from this city had his head thrown into the tent of his brother after the Battle of the Metaurus River. Salt was sown into the ground of this city so that it could never rebuild after its destruction, which was advocated by Cato the Elder. For the point, name this African city, led in the Punic Wars by Hannibal Barca.
Answer: Carthage

4316. This man challenged Americans to “do our duty as we understand it” by having “faith that right makes might.” This orator of the Peoria Speech looked to “bind up the nation’s wounds” “with Malice toward none, with charity for all” in his Second Inaugural Address. For the point, name this U.S. president who claimed “that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth” in his Gettysburg Address.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln

4317. At this event's conclusion, during the siege of Holbeche House, the perpetrator Thomas Wintour was captured. A letter of warning sent to Lord Monteagle thwarted this event, which was planned by Roger Catesby. For the point, name this event, annually commemorated on November 5, in which a group of conspirators including Guy Fawkes attempted to blow up James I’s parliament.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot Page 4

4318. This policy was protested by a women’s group known as the Black Sash. This policy created enclaves of territory called bantustans. One aspect of this policy, the requirement for internal passports, was protested at the Sharpeville Massacre. F.W. de Klerk’s government helped end this policy through negotiations with the African National Congress. For the point, name this policy of racial segregation in South Africa.
Answer: Apartheid (

4319. A critic of this leader was mysteriously shot to death while crossing the Bolshoy Bridge; that man was Boris Nemtsov. US intelligence officials have accused this leader of being personally involved in November’s U.S. Presidential election. For the point, name this current President of Russia.
Answer: Vladimir Putin

4320. A non-presidential resident of this state named Harry Truman died when he refused to evacuate his home during a natural disaster. Pioneer Square in this state was the site of riots on Mardi Gras in 2001, just two years after riots on N30, or November 30th, rocked this state during a meeting of the World Trade Organization. For the 1962 World’s Fair, the largest city in this state constructed the Space Needle. For the point, name this state, the location of the Mount St. Helens eruption and the Battle in Seattle.
Answer: Washington Washington Page 5

4321. The city of Ravenna hid one of these things, belonging to Dante, behind a false wall when Florentine agents tried to steal it. One of these objects was smuggled to Venice from Alexandria in a crate of rotting pork and cabbages. In an 897 synod, Pope Stephen VI put one of these objects, belonging to Pope Formosus, on trial. Another of these objects, belonging to Vladimir Lenin, remains on display in Moscow in his mausoleum. For the point, name these things, which are usually placed in graves.
Answer: dead bodies (

4322. In the 1950s, the British carried out this tactic via 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid in Malaya during the Emergency. Even though that use was largely ineffective, it encouraged the United States to perform this tactic, causing dioxin poisoning in Vietnam. Agent Orange is a chemical used for this process, which threatens oranguatan habitats in Indonesia for the sake of palm oil production. "Slash and burn" is a common method of, for the point, what environmentally dangerous action that, controversially, creates farmland in the Amazon?
Answer: deforestation (

4323. This dynasty raised the Huai army to defeat a rebellion when its Green Standard armies proved ineffective. This dynasty tried to reform through the Self-Strengthening Movement. A man claiming to be the brother of Jesus, Hong Xiuquan [shiu-chwan], led a rebellion against this dynasty from his capital of Nanjing. The Eight-Nation Alliance forced its ruler, Cixi [see-shee], to provide reparations after attacks on Westerners in Beijing. For the point, name this dynasty that faced the Taiping and Boxer rebellions, the last imperial dynasty to rule China.
Answer: Qing [ching] Dynasty (or Manchu Dynasty; do not

4324. Most knowledge about this battle is derived from the Mozarabic Chronicle. One side in this battle had been called to aid Odo the Great after he had suffered heavy losses at Toulouse and Bordeaux. This battle was lost by an unsuccessful uphill cavalry charge ordered by Abd ar-Rahman, and the winner of this battle was granted the nickname “the hammer.” For the point, name this battle in which Charles Martel halted the Muslim invasion of Western Europe.
Answer: Battle of Tours (or Battle of Poitiers)

4325. This man advocated for war to protect national honor in his Mansion House Speech, given in response to the Agadir Crisis. He heavily increased a land tax to fund welfare programs in his “People’s Budget,” and this leader’s foreign minister advocated for the “establishment...of a national home of the Jewish people” in the Balfour Declaration. For the point, name this Welsh prime minister who led Britain through World War I.
Answer: David Lloyd George (

4326. To streamline this effort, crews were banned from leaving to go to snack bars, and Jeeps were converted into mobile snack shops; that improvement was made after Black Friday by its new commander, William Tunner. This effort led to the creation of a new runway at Tempelhof Airport and it included morale-boosting candy drops to children, called Operation Little Vittles. This event used C- 54 transports to carry coal and food. For the point, name this 1948-49 effort to supply an Allied city that had been cut off by Soviets in East Germany.
Answer: Berlin Airlift (

4327. This country paid families in the U.S. $80,000 as negotiated by Caleb Cushing, after troops from this country executed people on board the Virginius. The unknown source of the Arkansas River shifted a boundary that had been defined in an 1819 treaty between the U.S. and this country; that treaty was negotiated by John Quincy Adams and Luis de Onis. For the point, name this European country that fought an 1898 war against the U.S. after the explosion of the Maine.
Answer: Spain

4328. This city was the western terminus of the Khorasan Road and was situated just north of Ctesiphon. This city, the site of the Translation Movement, was founded by al-Mansur after his brother’s victory at the Battle of Zab. Harun al-Rashid constructed the House of Wisdom in this city, which was brutally sacked by Hulagu Khan as the Tigris ran "black with ink" and "red with blood." For the point, name this center of Islamic learning and culture, the capital of both the Abbasid Caliphate and modern Iraq.
Answer: Baghdad Page 2

4329. A Japanese version of this institution called the Ooku was created by Tokugawa Hidetada. Leaders of another of these institutions held either the title of Haseki or Valide. According to a probably fabricated legend, the Yongle Emperor killed 2800 members of one of these institutions to suppress a scandal. This term generally refers to a reserved domestic space, but has taken on the connotation of a brothel. For the point, give this term for the quarters of the wives and concubines of imperial Ottoman rulers.
Answer: harem (

4330. This general was victorious against Onomarchus at Crocus Field, one of the bloodiest battles in ancient history. A stray vine prevented the escape of this man’s assassin, Pausanias. This man was given the one-word reply “If” after issuing a series of threats to Sparta. This man created the League of Corinth to oppose Persia shortly after he defeated Thebes’s Sacred Band at Chaeronea. For the point, name this Macedonian ruler and father of Alexander the Great.
Answer: Philip II of Macedon

4331. Holders of this position presided over a supreme court called the hofgericht [hoff-gehr-isht]. A holder of this position enforced peace among his vassals by passing the Ewiger Landfriede [eh-vig-er land-free-deh]. This title was created for a man who rescued John XII and had previously won the Battle of Lechfeld. According to the Golden Bull of 1356, seven electors chose the next holder of this position, which was dominated by the Habsburgs for 400 years. For the point, name this position, the ruler of a loose confederation of Germanic states.
Answer: Holy Roman Emperor

4332. A successful example of this type of business was founded in Philadelphia by Stephen Girard in 1811 after the “First” of these “of the US” had its charter expire. The “Pet” and “Wildcat” varieties of these businesses were active in the 1830s after Andrew Jackson effectively killed the United States’s second national one. For the point, name these businesses, modern examples of which include Wells Fargo and JPMorgan Chase, which are responsible for storing and lending money.
Answer: banks

4333. The Russian Empire helped foment this conflict by sponsoring the Orlov Revolt. The London Protocol ended this conflict shortly after Edward Codrington outmaneuvered Ibrahim Pasha at the Battle of Navarino. Alexander Ypsilantis led one side in this conflict, which was depicted by Eugene Delacroix in his Massacre at Chios and Ruins of Missolonghi. Lord Byron died fighting in, for the point, what 1820s war in which the First Hellenic Republic broke away from the Ottoman Empire?
Answer: Greek War of Independence Page 3

4334. This event was the result of the “Biennio Rosso,” or “two red years.” A king refused to authorize Luigi Facta’s use of force to stop this event, which led to the following year’s Acerbo [ah-chair-boh] Law granting one party a parliamentary majority. Michele [mee-KAY-leh] Bianchi and Cesare [CHAY-sar-ay] Vecchi organized this event, which prompted Victor Emmanuel III to transfer power to the leader of the Blackshirts. For the point, name this event in which Benito Mussolini seized power after his men entered the capital city of Italy.
Answer: March on Rome (

4335. This composition is often erroneously claimed to be the first of its type to include trombone and piccolo. Its third movement borrows a theme from Mozart’s Symphony no. 40, and was premiered in an 1808 concert along with the next piece of its type by the same composer. A theme from this work was used in the “V for Victory” campaign during World War II and has been described as “fate knocking at the door.” For the point, name this Ludwig van Beethoven symphony in C minor, famous for its short- short-short-long opening motif.
Answer: Ludwig van Beethoven’s Symphony no. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (”Beethoven” and “Symphony” not needed after mention)

4336. A member of this class wrote The Book of the Five Rings, which advises against stylish flourishes. The importance of this class was lessened by the introduction of the arquebus, which shifted focus to the lightly armored Ashigaru. After the Ako Incident, 47 members of this class, which were relabeled Ronin due to the death of their master, killed the offending court official. The bushido code is often attributed to, for the point, what class of Japanese warriors that are commonly depicted wielding katanas?
Answer: samurai (

4337. Jose Barrionuevo was imprisoned for his activities in this region. Families of those imprisoned from this region founded an activist group called Etxerat [etch-er-at]. Banned political parties from this region include Batasuna and Askatasuna. The GAL, an illegal paramilitary group founded by the government of Felipe Gonzalez, once operated in this region to fight the ETA, a terrorist group that promoted this region’s separation. Bilbao is the largest city in, for the point, what highly nationalistic region of northern Spain?
Answer: Basque Country Page 4

4338. During an October 1967 protest at this facility, George Harris placed carnations in the barrels of the guns of soldiers. The Phoenix Project helped repair this facility after Hani Hanjour and four others hijacked American Airlines Flight 77 and crashed it into this structure, which includes over six million feet of floor space in a building only five floors high. For the point, name this Arlington County, Virginia facility that houses the Department of Defense and is named for its shape.
Answer: the Pentagon

4339. This king is the subject of a mostly-lost epic poem set at Paderborn. This ruler was unable to secure the submission of the Duchy of Benevento when he subjugated the Lombard kingdom. Alcuin was a notable philosopher during this man’s reign, which was chronicled by his biographer Einhard. His defeat at Roncevaux Pass inspired The Song of Roland. For the point, name this Carolingian king who was crowned by Leo III on Christmas Day 800 as the first Holy Roman Emperor.
Answer: Charlemagne (

4340. This man advised Auda Abu Tayi during the Battle of Aqaba and led guerrilla attacks on the Hejaz Railway. This man described his experiences, including his victory at the Battle of Tafileh that earned him a Distinguished Cross, in Seven Pillars of Wisdom. This man’s promises of an Arab homeland were violated by the Sykes-Picot Treaty. For the point, name this British soldier who fought the Ottoman Empire in the Middle East during World War I.
Answer: Thomas Edward Lawrence (or Lawrence of Arabia)

4341. A week after this man criticized his political party, the "Declaration of 46" letter agreed with his concerns. This man wrote The Revolution Betrayed while living in exile with Diego Rivera. As Commissar of Foreign Affairs, this man handed the Baltic States to Kaiser Wilhelm II by signing the Treaty of Brest- Litovsk. Years after he founded the Red Army, this man was killed in Mexico by an ice pick to the head. For the point, name this Soviet politician who lost a power struggle with Joseph Stalin.
Answer: Leon Trotsky

4342. This man was forced into exile after Publius Clodius Pulcher passed a law targeting those who executed Roman citizens without trial. He rose to prominence by successfully prosecuting Gaius Verres. As consul, he exposed the Catiline Conspiracy to the Senate and was awarded the title Pater Patriae. For the point, name this politician, a staunch supporter of the Roman Republic and notable orator who opposed Mark Antony with his Philippics.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero

4343. This city faced the revolt of Spendius and Mathos over unpaid soldier salaries in the Mercenary War. A commander from this city had his head thrown into the tent of his brother after the Battle of the Metaurus River. Salt was sown into the ground of this city so that it could never rebuild after its destruction, which was advocated by Cato the Elder. For the point, name this African city, led in the Punic Wars by Hannibal Barca.
Answer: Carthage Page 5

4344. This man believed Nebraska brought forth a “sacred right” and placed “it on the high road to extension and perpetuity.” This man challenged Americans to “do our duty as we understand it” by having “faith that right makes might.” This orator of the Peoria Speech looked to “bind up the nation’s wounds” “with Malice toward none, with charity for all” in his Second Inaugural Address. For the point, name this U.S. president who claimed “that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth” in his Gettysburg Address.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln

4345. In response to criticism of this country’s human rights record, this country's leader responded “it is better to be a dictator than to be gay.” In a 2007 radio broadcast, that leader blamed Jews for “turning the city of Babruysk into a pigsty.” This country’s capital city is the namesake of two failed ceasefire agreements over the conflict in eastern Ukraine. In March 2017, protests erupted in this country over a newly introduced “social parasite tax.” For the point, name this country led by Alexander Lukashenko from Minsk.
Answer: Belarus

4346. During this event, “John Johnson” aroused suspicions when he claimed that the firewood he owned belonged to Thomas Percy. During the siege of Holbeche House at this event’s conclusion, the perpetrator Thomas Wintour was captured. A letter of warning sent to Lord Monteagle thwarted this event, which was planned by Roger Catesby. For the point, name this event, annually commemorated on November 5, in which a group of conspirators including Guy Fawkes attempted to blow up James I’s parliament.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot

4347. This policy was protested by a women’s group known as the Black Sash. It was condemned by the Lusaka Manifesto and a Security Council arms embargo. This policy created enclaves of territory called bantustans. One aspect of this policy, the requirement for internal passports, was protested at the Sharpeville Massacre. F.W. de Klerk’s government helped end this policy through negotiations with the African National Congress. For the point, name this policy of racial segregation in South Africa.
Answer: Apartheid (

4348. This leader called for a crackdown on alternative forms of alcohol after over 60 people died by drinking bath essence containing methanol. A critic of this leader was mysteriously shot to death while crossing the Bolshoy Bridge; that man was Boris Nemtsov. US intelligence officials have accused this leader of being personally involved in November’s U.S. Presidential election. For the point, name this current President of Russia.
Answer: Vladimir Putin Page 6

4349. A non-presidential resident of this state named Harry Truman died when he refused to evacuate his home during a natural disaster. Pioneer Square in this state was the site of riots on Mardi Gras in 2001, just two years after riots on N30, or November 30th, rocked this state during a meeting of the World Trade Organization. For the 1962 World’s Fair, the largest city in this state constructed the Space Needle. For the point, name this state, the location of the Mount St. Helens eruption and the Battle in Seattle.
Answer: Washington Washington Page 7

4350. Nearly half of a million people died in this country during the Grande Seca, a massive 1878 drought that caused mass migration out of the state of Ceara and its city of Fortaleza. Mato Grosso do Sul and other central states in this country rely on cattle farming in deforested land along its continent's largest river. For the point, name this country where over six million people live in Rio de Janeiro and millions more live along the Amazon River.
Answer: Brazil

4351. It is unknown whether Themistocles served as a strategos at this battle or simply fought in it; in the aftermath of this battle, Themistocles advocated the revamping of the Athenian fleet to protect against an invasion that came ten years later. Miltiades led the Athenians at, for the point, what victory over the Persians that ended Darius’ invasion of Greece in 490 BC?
Answer: Battle of Marathon

4352. These people took the Ark of the Covenant following their victory at the aforementioned Battle at Ebenezer. These people worshiped at the Temple of Dagon, which was toppled by a man who lost his sight and strength due to the guile of a woman of this ethnicity. Goliath and Delilah were members of, for the point, what ethnic group often in conflict with the Israelites of the Old Testament?
Answer: Philistines

4353. The loss of the Tourelles complex forced one army to withdraw from this city, where the Earl of Salisbury was slain. The destruction of bridges across the Loire [LWAH] delayed the capture of this city, which was relieved by a peasant woman who had visions of the Archangel Michael instructing her to protect France. For the point, name this city that was saved by the arrival of Joan of Arc in the Hundred Years War.
Answer: Orleans

4354. The Holy Alliance was created by Tsar Alexander I to preserve the effects of this event, whose Final Act created borders that stayed largely the same for 40 years. Talleyrand was able to negotiate a strong place for France at this event, which was dominated by Klemens von Metternich. For the point, name this event that shaped Europe after the fall of Napoleon.
Answer: Congress of Vienna Page 1

4355. During this war, the Cochrane and the Blanco Encalada defeated the ironclad Huascar in the Battle of Angamos. One nation lost Tarapaca and allowed the victor of this war to occupy Tacna and Arica, while another gave up the province of Antofagasta and its access to the sea. Control of saltpeter mines in the Atacama Desert was the impetus of, for the point, what 1879-1883 war in which Chile defeated Peru and Bolivia, named after a nearby ocean?
Answer: War of the Pacific (or Guerra del Pacifico)

4356. A royal garden in this country was depicted in the nocturne “In The Generalife.” This country was depicted in the Concierto de Aranjuez [ahr-ahn-HWETH] of Joaquin [hwa-KEEN] Rodrigo. Manuel de Falla was from, for the point, what birthplace of the classical guitar, where the Moors built the Alhambra before the Reconquista?
Answer: Spain

4357. A set of 22 Corinthian-style columns from this building was moved to the National Arboretum after this structure’s cast-iron dome was finished in 1866. William Thornton designed this building, whose interior includes Constantino Brumidi’s The Apotheosis of George Washington in a large Rotunda. For the point, name this U.S. government building that houses both the Senate and the House.
Answer: U.S. Capitol building

4358. This type of military unit became less prominent after a high rate of casualties suffered during Operation Mercury, an attack on Crete. During the Normandy invasion, "Rommel's asparagus" was used to hinder these troops, who served as pathfinders. Otto Skorzeny executed the Gran Sasso raid to rescue Benito Mussolini using these units, known as “fallschirmjagers” [fall-shirm-yea-gers]. For the point, name these infantry units, including the 101st “Screaming Eagles,” who jumped during D-Day.
Answer: paratroopers

4359. This European country harassed enemy colonies in a policy whose name translates as the “Grand Design.” The Amboyna Massacre was perpetrated by an organization based in this country whose emblem was the initials VOC. This country established the colony of Batavia, which later gained independence as part of Indonesia. For the point, name this home country of the first East India Company.
Answer: the Netherlands (or Holland

4360. This ruler allegedly ordered James Tyrell to murder Edward V and Richard of Shrewsbury, the “princes in the tower.” In 2012, the body of this king was found under a Leicester parking space marked with an "R." The betrayal of the Stanley family led to this king’s defeat to Henry VII at the Battle of Bosworth Field, marking the beginning of the Tudor dynasty. For the point, name this final king of the house of York.
Answer: Richard III Page 2

4361. The Admiral Clarey Bridge was built in a harbor of this island, providing easy connection to Ford Island. Diamond Head overlooks this island’s largest city. This island is home to a memorial built over the sunken hull of the USS Arizona, which was lost during a surprise attack on December 7, 1941. For the point, name this most populous Hawaiian island, home to Pearl Harbor and Honolulu.
Answer: Oahu

4362. Counteracting these events often requires large quantities of Corexit. In 2015, a company settled for more than $18 billion for their negligence in causing this type of event. One of these events took place in Prince William Sound in 1989 after the Exxon Valdez ran aground. The explosion on the BP rig Deepwater Horizon caused, for the point, what type of ecological disaster?
Answer: oil spill (

4363. This man noted that “The cavalries charged/the Indians died” in a work that lists American military actions and notes “you don’t count the dead when God’s on your side.” This singer rhetorically asked “How many roads must a man walk down?” in “Blowin’ in the Wind,” and advised people to “admit that the waters around you have grown” in “The Times They Are A-Changin.” For the point, name this American protest singer and 2016 Nobel Laureate.
Answer: Bob Dylan (or Robert Zimmerman)

4364. This organization initiated the stay-behind Operation Gladio to prepare for an armed resistance. This organization’s mutual defense principle, Article 5, has only been invoked once, immediately following the 9/11 attacks. The Able Archer exercise nearly caused a war between the Warsaw Pact and, for the point, what alliance, founded in 1949 to fight communism in Western Europe, that includes the U.S.?
Answer: NATO (or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization)

4365. This event was supposedly triggered by a picture with the caption “love is stronger than hate” written above a man kissing the Prophet Muhammad. The week after this event, the target responded with the words “all is forgiven” written above a cartoon of Muhammad holding a sign declaring “Je suis Charlie.” [zhe swee shar-lee] For the point, name this January 2015 attack on a French satirical magazine.
Answer: Charlie Hebdo massacre (or equivalents)

4366. This man's employees filmed a famous demonstration involving an animal that had killed Jesse Blount. That animal, named Topsy, was an elephant whose death was used by this man to show the dangers of a technology advocated by George Westinghouse. For the point, name this opponent of alternating current, an American inventor sometimes known as “The Wizard of Menlo Park” for inventing the movie camera and light bulb.
Answer: Thomas Alva Edison Page 3

4367. The Count’s Feud spread this movement in Denmark. Members of this movement condemned the execution of Michael Servetus. A leader of this movement wrote the Institute in Basel and passed the Ecclesiastical Ordinances of 1541 to make the city of Geneva a center of this movement. John Calvin was a member of, for the point, what movement that rejected the Catholic Church in Renaissance Europe?
Answer: Protestant Reformation (

4368. This technology's inventor was legendarily inspired after watching wasps build a nest. A 2006 discovery at Fangmatan challenges the theory that a court official created this commodity, rather suggesting that he simply standardized it. Cai Lun is commonly attributed to having created this commodity out of hemp and other fibers. For the point, name this technology that, like the compass, gunpowder, and printing, was one of the Four Great Inventions of ancient China and was used in mapmaking?
Answer: paper

4369. This country experienced the “mist hardships” after the eruption of the Laki fissure. Thingvellir was the site of this country’s legislative assembly, the Althing, for over a millennia. This country’s Prime Minister, Sigmundr David, resigned in 2016 after it was discovered that he had set up a company in the Virgin Islands to avoid tax payments. For the point, name this European island country with capital Reykjavik.
Answer: Iceland

4370. The founder of this kingdom lost control of Cyprus after a defeat to Antigonid Macedonia. It defeated its rival, the Seleucid Empire, at the Battle of Raphia for control of Syria. Its last ruler went on a luxury cruise with Julius Caesar and committed suicide after the death of her lover, Mark Antony. For the point, name this Diadochi kingdom ruled by the Ptolemaic dynasty, which ended with the death of Cleopatra.
Answer: Egypt (

4371. The Lapita people of the Solomon Islands are one of the earliest known cultures to work in this medium, using anthropomorphic geometric designs. Delft was a center of manufacture for works in this medium, particularly ones with intricate blue designs on a white tin-glaze background. Greek works in this medium were decorated with either red or black figures. For the point, name this process of decorating and firing clay to create vessels.
Answer: pottery or ceramics (

4372. On one voyage, this ship was forced to abandon the leaking Speedwell. Passengers aboard this ship included the captain Christopher Jones, military adviser Myles Standish, and future governor William Bradford. For the point, name this ship that landed at Plymouth Rock, carrying the first pilgrims to the New World in 1620.
Answer: Mayflower Page 4

4373. A major and rare success for one country in this war was the Brusilov Offensive, which targeted Galicia. That country suffered two disastrous defeats during this war at the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes and Tannenberg. One power withdrew from this war at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. For the point, name this war from which Russia withdrew after being taken over by the Bolsheviks, during which it fought with Britain and France against Imperial Germany.
Answer: World War I (

4374. Igor I ruled this state for three decades. Vladimir the Great Christianized this state, which moved its capital from Novgorod under Oleg, its first Grand Prince. The Mongols defeated this Rurikid-led state in the 13th century. For the point, name this Slavic state that controlled land in modern Russia and which is named in part for their capital city in modern Ukraine.
Answer: Kievan Rus Kievan Rus Page 5

4375. Nearly half of a million people died in this country during the Grande Seca, a massive 1878 drought that caused mass migration out of the state of Ceara and its city of Fortaleza. Mato Grosso do Sul and other central states in this country rely on cattle farming in deforested land along its continent's largest river. For the point, name this country where over six million people live in Rio de Janeiro and millions more live along the Amazon River.
Answer: Brazil

4376. At this battle, Cynaegirus had his hand cut off while trying to reel in an enemy ship. It is unknown whether Themistocles served as a strategos at this battle or simply fought in it; in the aftermath of this battle, Themistocles advocated the revamping of the Athenian fleet to protect against an invasion that came ten years later. Miltiades led the Athenians at, for the point, what victory over the Persians that ended Darius’ invasion of Greece in 490 BC?
Answer: Battle of Marathon

4377. A second century AD text about this ruler’s life opens with stories of his teacher, Upagupta, and of his previous life as Jaya, a boy who met the Buddha. This ruler defeated the Utkala in modern day Odisha, killing 200,000 soldiers and civilians according to a series of inscriptions on boulders and pillars throughout his empire. After winning the aforementioned Kalinga War, this son of Bindusara renounced violence and converted to Buddhism. For the point, name this third century BC Mauryan ruler.
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Asoka or Ashok)

4378. These people killed Hophni and Phinehas in battle; the news of their deaths shocked Eli so much that he fell from his chair, broke his neck, and died. These people took the Ark of the Covenant following their victory at the aforementioned Battle at Ebenezer. These people worshiped at the Temple of Dagon, which was toppled by a man who lost his sight and strength due to the guile of a woman of this ethnicity. Goliath and Delilah were members of, for the point, what ethnic group often in conflict with the Israelites of the Old Testament?
Answer: Philistines Page 1

4379. These people initiated the Slaughter of the Knezes against Serbian noblemen so that they could keep power within the Sanjak of Smederevo. After their leaders were executed in the Tower of Blood, these people were replaced by the “Victorious Soldiers of Muhammad.” Mahmud II ultimately disbanded this group in the 1826 Auspicious Incident. Members of this group were conscripted as young boys and converted from Christianity to Islam. For the point, name this elite Ottoman infantry corps.
Answer: Janissaries (or Janissary corps, etc.)

4380. A supply convoy headed to this city was intercepted in the Battle of the Herrings. The loss of the Tourelles complex forced one army to withdraw from this city, where the Earl of Salisbury was slain. The destruction of bridges across the Loire [LWAH] delayed the capture of this city, which was relieved by a peasant woman who had visions of the Archangel Michael instructing her to protect France. For the point, name this city that was saved by the arrival of Joan of Arc in the Hundred Years War.
Answer: Orleans

4381. This event was nearly derailed until the creation of a namesake part of Poland and the Province of Saxony. Spain was the lone member of the “Big Eight” to not agree to the result of this event. The Holy Alliance was created by Tsar Alexander I to preserve the effects of this event, whose Final Act created borders that stayed largely the same for 40 years. Talleyrand was able to negotiate a strong place for France at this event, which was dominated by Klemens von Metternich. For the point, name this event that shaped Europe after the fall of Napoleon.
Answer: Congress of Vienna

4382. This war began with the imposition of a ten cent tax, and Lynch’s expedition was sent during this war to collect other taxes. During this war, the Cochrane and the Blanco Encalada defeated the ironclad Huascar in the Battle of Angamos. One nation lost Tarapaca and allowed the victor of this war to occupy Tacna and Arica, while another gave up the province of Antofagasta and its access to the sea. Control of saltpeter mines in the Atacama Desert was the impetus of, for the point, what 1879-1883 war in which Chile defeated Peru and Bolivia, named after a nearby ocean?
Answer: War of the Pacific (or Guerra del Pacifico)

4383. A composition inspired by a set of royal gardens in this country opens its second movement with the English horn. Another royal garden in this country was depicted in the nocturne “In The Generalife.” This country was depicted in the Concierto de Aranjuez [ahr-ahn-HWETH] of Joaquin [hwa- KEEN] Rodrigo. Manuel de Falla was from, for the point, what birthplace of the classical guitar, where the Moors built the Alhambra before the Reconquista?
Answer: Spain Page 2

4384. The designer of this building defeated a French-inspired design by Stephen Hallet for its commission. A set of 22 Corinthian-style columns from this building was moved to the National Arboretum after this structure’s cast-iron dome was finished in 1866. William Thornton designed this building, whose interior includes Constantino Brumidi’s The Apotheosis of George Washington in a large Rotunda. For the point, name this U.S. government building that houses both the Senate and the House.
Answer: U.S. Capitol building

4385. Athenians who performed a special type of this process were known as cleruchs; the first such example was probably done at Salamis. A brand from an original prytaneum was used in the ceremonial beginning of this process, which started taking place in Ionia, Thrace, and Italy in the 700s BC. Syracuse was created as a result of, for the point, what general process that spread ancient Greek culture and, more crucially, people, throughout the Mediterranean?
Answer: ancient Greek colonization (

4386. This type of force first saw combat during the capture of Masnedo fortress. These forces became less prominent after a high rate of casualties suffered during Operation Mercury, an attack on Crete. During the Normandy invasion, "Rommel's asparagus" was used to hinder these troops, who served as pathfinders. Otto Skorzeny executed the Gran Sasso raid to rescue Benito Mussolini using these units, known as “fallschirmjagers” [fall-shirm-yea-gers]. For the point, name these infantry units, including the 101st “Screaming Eagles,” who jumped during D-Day.
Answer: paratroopers

4387. This man, not Edward de Vere, was the first historical figure accused of actually writing Shakespeare’s plays. This man identified four separate misconceptions faced by human beings during the pursuit of knowledge as “idols” and laid forth his technique of inductive reasoning in his The New Atlantis. The island of Bensalem was created by, for the point, what early English philosopher who is often called the father of the scientific method?
Answer: Sir Francis Bacon (

4388. Forces from this European country were defeated by the Travancore Kingdom in the Battle of Colachel. This European power harassed enemy colonies in a policy whose name translates as the “Grand Design.” The Amboyna Massacre was perpetrated by an organization based in this country whose emblem was the initials VOC. This country established the colony of Batavia, which later gained independence as part of Indonesia. For the point, name this home country of the first East India Company.
Answer: the Netherlands (or Holland

4389. Matthew Fontaine Maury designed torpedoes that were used by this navy, which was coordinated by Stephen Mallory. The Housatonic was sunk by a submarine operated by this navy, the Hunley. Officer Raphael Semmes captained this navy’s commerce raider Alabama, and this navy used blockade runners to smuggle cotton out of its ports. For the point, name this navy, which was blamed for the loss of New Orleans to Union forces in 1862.
Answer: navy of the Confederacy (

4390. During a rebellion against this ruler, a gale prevented Henry Stafford from importing troops from Brittany. This ruler allegedly ordered James Tyrell to murder Edward V and Richard of Shrewsbury, the “princes in the tower.” In 2012, the body of this king was found under a Leicester parking space marked with an "R." The betrayal of the Stanley family led to this king’s defeat to Henry VII at the Battle of Bosworth Field, marking the beginning of the Tudor dynasty. For the point, name this final king of the house of York.
Answer: Richard III

4391. A national cemetery is located in this island’s Punchbowl Crater. The Admiral Clarey Bridge was built in a harbor of this island, providing easy connection to Ford Island. Diamond Head overlooks this island’s largest city. This island is home to a memorial built over the sunken hull of the USS Arizona, which was lost during a surprise attack on December 7, 1941. For the point, name this most populous Hawaiian island, home to Pearl Harbor and Honolulu.
Answer: Oahu

4392. In the wake of one of these events, Joseph Hazelwood was found guilty of only a misdemeanor. Counteracting these events often requires large quantities of Corexit. In 2015, a company settled for more than $18 billion for their negligence in causing this type of event. One of these events took place in Prince William Sound in 1989 after the Exxon Valdez ran aground. The explosion on the BP rig Deepwater Horizon caused, for the point, what type of ecological disaster?
Answer: oil spill (

4393. This man asked “Is your money that good? Will it buy you forgiveness? Do you think that it could?” in a work condemning the “Masters of War.” He noted that “The cavalries charged/the Indians died” in a work that lists American military actions and notes “you don’t count the dead when God’s on your side.” This singer rhetorically asked “How many roads must a man walk down?” in “Blowin’ in the Wind,” and advised people to “admit that the waters around you have grown” in “The Times They Are A-Changin.” For the point, name this American protest singer and 2016 Nobel Laureate.
Answer: Bob Dylan (or Robert Zimmerman) Page 4

4394. This organization created a trust-building program with its former rivals called Partnership for Peace. It initiated the stay-behind Operation Gladio to prepare for an armed resistance. This organization’s mutual defense principle, Article 5, has only been invoked once, immediately following the 9/11 attacks. The Able Archer exercise nearly caused a war between the Warsaw Pact and, for the point, what alliance, founded in 1949 to fight communism in Western Europe, that includes the U.S.?
Answer: NATO (or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization)

4395. The Independent responded to this event with an image of a hand coming out of a page giving the middle finger and holding a pen dripping blood. This event had supposedly been triggered by a picture with the caption “love is stronger than hate” written above a man kissing the Prophet Muhammad. The week after this event, the target responded with the words “all is forgiven” written above a cartoon of Muhammad holding a sign declaring “Je suis Charlie.” [zhe swee shar-lee] For the point, name this January 2015 attack on a French satirical magazine.
Answer: Charlie Hebdo massacre (or equivalents)

4396. While working under this man, William Joseph Hammer discovered what he called a “Phantom Shadow.” An animal that had killed Jesse Blount was used in a famous demonstration filmed by this man’s employees; that animal, named Topsy, was an elephant whose death was used by this man to show the dangers of a technology advocated by George Westinghouse. For the point, name this opponent of alternating current, an American inventor sometimes known as “The Wizard of Menlo Park” for inventing the movie camera and light bulb.
Answer: Thomas Alva Edison

4397. This technology's inventor was legendarily inspired after watching wasps build a nest. A 2006 discovery at Fangmatan challenges the theory that a court official created this commodity, rather suggesting that he simply standardized it. Cai Lun is commonly attributed to having created this commodity out of hemp and other fibers. For the point, name this technology that, like the compass, gunpowder, and printing, was one of the Four Great Inventions of ancient China and was used in mapmaking?
Answer: paper

4398. A member of this movement, Johannes Bugenhagen, was called Doctor Pomeranus and crowned Christian III. The Count’s Feud spread this movement in Denmark. Members of this movement condemned the execution of Michael Servetus. A leader of this movement wrote the Institute in Basel and passed the Ecclesiastical Ordinances of 1541 to make the city of Geneva a center of this movement. John Calvin was a member of, for the point, what movement that rejected the Catholic Church in Renaissance Europe?
Answer: Protestant Reformation (

4399. During World War II, the United Kingdom invaded this modern day country as part of Operation Fork. This country experienced the “mist hardships” after the eruption of the Laki fissure. Thingvellir was the site of this country’s legislative assembly, the Althing, for over a millennia. This country’s Prime Minister, Sigmundr David, resigned in 2016 after it was discovered that he had set up a company in the Virgin Islands to avoid tax payments. For the point, name this European island country with capital Reykjavik.
Answer: Iceland

4400. This kingdom fought a war with its northern neighbor after the murder of its princess Berenice. The founder of this kingdom lost control of Cyprus after a defeat to Antigonid Macedonia. It defeated its rival, the Seleucid Empire, at the Battle of Raphia for control of Syria. Its last ruler went on a luxury cruise with Julius Caesar and committed suicide after the death of her lover, Mark Antony. For the point, name this Diadochi kingdom ruled by the Ptolemaic dynasty, which ended with the death of Cleopatra.
Answer: Egypt (

4401. The Lapita people of the Solomon Islands are one of the earliest known cultures to work in this medium, using anthropomorphic geometric designs. Maria Martinez worked in this medium using matte black-on-black motifs made with slip in an art-deco style. Delft was a center of manufacture for works in this medium, particularly ones with intricate blue designs on a white tin-glaze background. Greek works in this medium were decorated with either red or black figures. For the point, name this process of decorating and firing clay to create vessels.
Answer: pottery or ceramics (

4402. Sailors aboard this ship launched an expedition to Corn Hill, which was then looted, according to Nathaniel Philbrick. On one voyage, this ship was forced to abandon the leaking Speedwell. Passengers aboard this ship included the captain Christopher Jones, military adviser Myles Standish, and future governor William Bradford. For the point, name this ship that landed at Plymouth Rock, carrying the first pilgrims to the New World in 1620.
Answer: Mayflower

4403. A treaty ending this war called for the creation of the United Baltic Duchy. A major and rare success for one country in this war was the Brusilov Offensive, which targeted Galicia. That country suffered two disastrous defeats during this war at the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes and Tannenberg. One power withdrew from this war at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. For the point, name this war from which Russia withdrew after being taken over by the Bolsheviks, during which it fought with Britain and France against Imperial Germany.
Answer: World War I (

4404. The Schechter letter details this state’s failed invasion of Khazaria and ensuing invasion of the Byzantine Empire, which ended in a failed 941 siege of Constantinople. That siege was led by Igor I, who ruled this state for three decades. Vladimir the Great Christianized this state, which moved its capital from Novgorod under Oleg, its first Grand Prince. The Mongols defeated this Rurikid-led state in the 13th century. For the point, name this Slavic state that controlled land in modern Russia and which is named in part for their capital city in modern Ukraine.
Answer: Kievan Rus Kievan Rus Page 7

4405. After waiting over 800 days to be confirmed as U.S. Ambassador to this country, Cassandra Butts died of leukemia in 2016. The Hawksbill Creek Agreement guarantees that a planned city in this country enjoys no taxation; that city of Freeport on this country’s “Grand” island is now a prominent tourist hub. During the Civil War, blockade runners left from Charleston to this country’s port of Nassau. For ten points, name this member of the British Commonwealth, an island chain just east of Florida and northeast of Cuba.
Answer: (Commonwealth of) The Bahamas

4406. An event that took place at this location filled the North Fork of the Toutle River with sediment and destroyed the tourist camps at Spirit Lake. At this location, known to the Klickitat tribe as Louwala- Clough, photographer Reid Blackburn was killed near Coldwater Camp; in the aftermath of that event, Jimmy Carter described this location’s surroundings as more desolate than a moonscape. For ten points, name this mountain in the Cascades that killed 57 people in a May 18, 1980 volcanic eruption.
Answer: Mount St. Helens (or Louwala-Clough before mention)

4407. The technology of square set timbering was developed to aid in the extraction of this commodity. Investors who held stockpiles of this commodity nicknamed a piece of harmful legislation the “Crime of ‘73.” John Sherman names an act that required the U.S. government to purchase this commodity. The Bland-Allison Act mandated that the government create coins from, for ten points, what metal, which was once traded at a sixteen to one ratio for gold?
Answer: silver

4408. This action’s legitimacy is inferred from Article 27 Section 3 of a certain document. In 1986, this action prevented Nicaragua from being compensated after its victory in the International Court of Justice. Vyacheslav Molotov was noted for performing this action repeatedly, but the Soviet Union was unable to perform this action during the Korean War. The possibility of this action leads to the use of straw polls prior to the official election of a new Secretary General. For ten points, name this action that can be performed by France, Russia, China, the UK, or the US, the five permanent members of a body of 15 countries within the United Nations.
Answer: United Nations Security Council veto (

4409. This man formulated Operation Paukenschlag, part of a military plan also known as the “Second Happy Time.” This man issued a command to disregard drowning sailors after a B-24 bomber attacked a ship carrying survivors of the Laconia. This head of state under the Flensburg government pioneered “wolfpack” tactics in the Battle of the Atlantic. For ten points, name this admiral who advocated for unlimited U-boat warfare, then surrendered to the Allies after he was named Adolf Hitler’s successor as President of Germany.
Answer: Karl Dönitz Page 1

4410. This President won the presidency thanks to James Birney’s Liberty Party sapping his opponent’s anti-slavery support in states like New York. He died just three months after leaving office, a record for shortest Presidential retirement. This man is the only President to have once been Speaker of the House. Supporters of this “dark horse” winner chanted “54-40 or fight!” in endorsing his policy of expansionism. For ten points, name this U.S. President during the Mexican-American War.
Answer: James Knox Polk

4411. This man built a temple to Mars the Avenger in his namesake forum. One depiction of this man known as the Via Labicana shows him wearing a veil as Pontifex Maximus. Another depiction of this man rests his bare right foot next to Cupid riding a dolphin, indicating his divine heritage; that statue shows this man wearing a cuirass engraved with a cosmic scene of the return of standards from Parthia, and was found at Livia’s villa in Primaporta. For ten points, name this first Roman emperor.
Answer: Augustus Caesar (or Octavian or Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus)

4412. Part of this man is shown floating in a halo in a Symbolist painting by Gustave Moreau. Depictions of this man as an adult often show him wearing a robe of camel’s hair, including one to the right of the central figure on the Ghent Altarpiece. With Jesus, this figure is the second infant in Leonardo’s Virgin of the Rocks, and his decapitated head is sometimes shown on a silver platter being presented to Salome [sah-low-may] following his execution by Herod. For ten points, name this Biblical figure, a cousin of Jesus who performed a ritual on him in the Jordan River.
Answer: (Saint) John the Baptist (or Yahya

4413. An observatory dedicated to this natural feature is located in the town of Parkfield. This feature meets the ocean at Mussel Rock. One event caused by this natural feature caused the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway and was broadcast live during the 1989 World Series. A disaster named for Loma Prieta was caused by, for ten points, what boundary between the Pacific and North American Plates whose movement also led to the 1906 San Francisco earthquake?
Answer: San Andreas Fault

4414. When this man was caught in a lie about Secretary of Agriculture Clinton Anderson’s findings about sugar supplies, he noted that he “didn’t give a tinker’s damn” about what Anderson had really said. The Tydings Committee investigated this man’s claim, made in a Lincoln Day speech in Wheeling, that he held a list of 205 names of State Department members with questionable loyalties. For ten points, name this Wisconsin senator known for hunting communists during the Red Scare.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy Second Quarter

4415. This treaty’s Protocol of Queretaro was later ignored because one side’s representatives did not have the power to agree to it. Article XI of this treaty attempted to resolve cross-border raids by the Apache tribe, and territorial disputes arising from this treaty were later settled by the Treaty of Mesila in the Gadsden Purchase. The Rio Grande was set as the southern boundary of Texas in this treaty, which granted California to the United States. For ten points, name this treaty that ended the Mexican- American war.
Answer: Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo BONUS: The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was embraced by those who supported this expansionist belief. This concept, whose name is usually attributed to John O’Sullivan, argues that American exceptionalism entitles the U.S. to expand to the Pacific coast. Manifest Destiny Page 2

4416. The Sanskrit word preta describes supernatural beings that underwent this process and became chronically hungry. Buddhist scholars have debated whether bardo takes place during this process, an idea recorded in the Tibetan Book of the Dead, since shortly after the death of the Buddha. A soul that has achieved moksha has been liberated from samsara, the eternal cycle of this process. For ten points, name this process that, in Jainism, Buddhism, and Hinduism, occurs after death.
Answer: reincarnation (or rebirth

4417. In 2006, 11 people in this country’s town of Ishaqi in Balad province were killed and their house blown up; cables released by Wikileaks indicate that U.S. forces were responsible for that incident. Camp Speicher, an air force base in this country’s city of Tikrit, was attacked by ISIS in 2014, killing over 1,500 Shia cadets. In 2007, George W. Bush ordered a “surge” of troops into, for ten points, what Middle Eastern country invaded by U.S. forces in 2003?
Answer: Iraq BONUS: Employees of this private security company, which has since been renamed XE Services and Academi, killed 17 people in the

4418. This ruler abandoned his French allies by signing the Treaty of Breslau, exiting a conflict he later re-entered by invading Bohemia. This ruler’s father captured him in the act of fleeing to England, then forced him to watch the execution of his lover, Hans van Katte. This ruler connected his territory in the First Partition of Poland, and this builder of Sanssouci [san-soo-see] Palace started the War of the Austrian Succession by invading Silesia. For ten points, name this “Great” king of Prussia.
Answer: Frederick the Great (or Frederick II) BONUS: Frederick allied himself in the Seven Years War with England against Russia, France, and Austria in this event, a reversal of traditional European alliances. Diplomatic Revolution

4419. Collier’s magazine said that this idea “hit the popularity jackpot” while Walter Lippman criticized it for being the “tocsin of an ideological crusade.” This idea was created in the context of a conflict involving the ELAS and EAM that included the bloody Dekemvriana. This policy built upon the “quarantine” policy of the previous president and was itself followed up with the Marshall Plan. This policy was first implemented when Greece and Turkey were given $400 million. For ten points, name this presidential doctrine that pledged aid to countries fighting Communism.
Answer: Truman Doctrine BONUS: The Dekemvriana took place on the streets of this city, where a “White Terror” then punished the leftists ELAS and EAM. Athens Page 3

4420. This play’s line “I will save you tomorrow... from yourself I will save you” is often omitted because its Act 2, Scene 2 is usually not performed. Liam Neeson starred in a 2002 revival of this play, in which a “poppet” is created by Mary Warren. After asking for “more weight,” Giles Corey is crushed to death in this play. John Proctor is hanged at the end of, for ten points, what Red Scare allegory set during the Salem Witch Trials, a play written by Arthur Miller?
Answer: The Crucible BONUS: Another Arthur Miller play, Incident at this location, is

4421. Civitella del Tronto offered some of the last resistance to this campaign, which ended with the Handshake at Teano. The Battle of the Voltornus drove one side in this campaign into the fortress of Gaeta, which was surrendered by Queen Marie-Sophie and Francis II. Fernandino Lanza surrendered Palermo during this campaign, shortly after the leader of one side declared dictatorship in the name of Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia. For ten points, name this campaign in the Risorgimento in which Garibaldi’s Redshirts conquered southern Italy.
Answer: Expedition of a Thousand (

4422. This activity, when conducted in a morally incorrect way, was condemned as “nefas” by the Ancient Romans. Augustine used Romans 13:4 to support this activity when conducted by the church. The School of Salamanca attempted to develop a theory of this activity based on Thomas Aquinas’ three conditions for its justification. The rights of jus in bello and jus ad bellum both involve this activity. For ten points, name this general term for an armed conflict between societies.
Answer: war (

4423. Prior American policy of not officially supporting either side, also held by Switzerland.
Answer: neutrality (

4424. Type of vehicle operated by “Aces” such as Eddie Rickenbacker and the German Red Baron.
Answer: aircraft (

4425. Note sent by Germany proposing an anti-American alliance with Mexico.
Answer: Zimmerman Telegram

4426. Secretary of State who resigned in 1915, years after delivering the “Cross of Gold” speech?
Answer: William Jennings Bryan

4427. Man, nicknamed “Black Jack,” who led the American Expeditionary Force.
Answer: John Pershing

4428. Slang term that described A.E.F. infantrymen and marines and was eventually superseded by “GIs” in World War II.
Answer: Doughboys

4429. Businessman who oversaw the War Industries Board to oversee American military preparedness.
Answer: Bernard Baruch Pompey the Great Name the...

4430. Rival of Pompey who became dictator of Rome before his assassination in front of a statue of Pompey.
Answer: Gaius Julius Caesar

4431. Type of outlaws that targeted Roman shipping and which Pompey fought in the Mediterranean.
Answer: pirates

4432. Title held by Pompey three times, the highest elected position in Rome.
Answer: consul

4433. Celebration undertaken by Pompey three times, granted when soldiers acclaimed their general as imperator.
Answer: triumph (

4434. Ally of Pompey and member of the First Triumvirate who died fighting the Parthians at the Battle of Carrhae.
Answer: Marcus Licinius Crassus

4435. Region that Pompey conquered from Mithridates the Great. It was home to the Kingdoms of Pontus and Bithynia on the eastern end of Rome’s territory.
Answer: Asia Minor (or Anatolia

4436. Roman law that gave Pompey the power to defeat the aforementioned Mediterannean outlaws.
Answer: Lex Gabinia

4437. Rebellious general in Hispania that Pompey fought at the beginning of his career. He successfully waged a guerrila war against Rome.
Answer: Quintus Sertorius Figures in Philippine History Name the...

4438. Former Mayor of Davao City and current President of the Philippines.
Answer: Rodrigo Duterte Page 5

4439. Combat sport mastered by Filipino Senator Manny Pacquiao [pack-ee-ow].
Answer: boxing (

4440. Fashion item of which former First Lady Imelda Marcos collected hundreds of pairs.
Answer: shoes

4441. U.S. President who led during the Spanish-American War and retained the Philippines thereafter.
Answer: William McKinley

4442. First President of the Philippines, who fought until 1901 against the United States.
Answer: Emilio Aguinaldo

4443. Revolutionary author of Noli Me Tangere who was executed in 1896 by the Spanish.
Answer: Jose Rizal

4444. First female President, who succeeded Ferdinand Marcos after the People Power Revolution.
Answer: Corazon Aquino

4445. Second female President, who was acquitted of lottery theft in 2016.
Answer: Gloria Macapagal Arroyo Fourth Quarter

4446. As the leader of one governmental agency, this man claimed “whatever their politics, they shall be fed!” and refused to deny relief for the Soviet Union. This man and his wife would frequently converse in Mandarin to foil eavesdroppers, and this former (+) engineer authored a widely read textbook on the Principles of Mining. This President reluctantly signed the Hawley- Smoot Tariff, (*) worsening an economic disaster. For ten points, name this oft-maligned Republican President, the namesake of shantytowns during his time in office at the start of the Great Depression.
Answer: Herbert Hoover

4447. This scientist discovered that respiration is a form of combustion and that diamonds are composed of carbon. Works by this chemist include his Essays Physical and Chemical and his Elementary Treatise on Chemistry. This chemist (+) named oxygen and hydrogen and disproved the phlogiston theory; he also developed the law of conservation of mass before losing his (*) head to the guillotine. For ten points, name this French scientist, often considered the father of modern chemistry.
Answer: Antoine Lavoisier

4448. James Frazer used the post-hoc fallacy to explain the development of this concept in early culture. Marcel Mauss and Henri Hubert developed a sociological theory of this phenomenon which claimed that it was the “private” manifestation of (+) religion. Ralph Merrifield first defined this concept in anthropology as the use of practices intended to harness the occult. This concept was described in (*) “Coral Gardens” in a Bronislaw Malinowski work about these beliefs in the Trobriand Islands. For ten points, name this idea that rituals, actions, and symbols can be used to exploit the supernatural, supposedly performed by wizards.
Answer: magic (broadly

4449. Subsections of this archipelago include the Islands of Four Mountains and the Fox Islands. This island chain is geologically related to the Commander Islands, and its indigenous people refer to themselves as (+) Unangan. Fort Mears and the naval base at Dutch Harbor were bombed by the Japanese during this archipelago’s namesake campaign, which saw the capture of Page 6IHBB Asian Championships Bowl 2016-2017 Bowl Round 9 two islands and the only fighting on (*) North American soil during World War II. Attu is part of, for ten points, what Alaskan island chain?
Answer: Aleutian Islands

4450. In this country, the U.S. distributed copies of the Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare manual. In 1986, the U.S. was censured by the International Court of Justice for mining this country’s commercial (+) harbors. American funding to this country was officially halted by the Boland Amendment, but money was re-routed to one of its right-leaning factions by (*) Oliver North. For ten points, name this Central American country, the subject of a scandal during the Reagan administration involving its Contra guerrillas.
Answer: Nicaragua

4451. Gustavus Fox’s attempt to relieve this location failed when the Powhatan was sent to Florida without his knowledge. Abner Doubleday ordered a cannon salvo on Cummings Point to defend this location. The unarmed (+) Star of the West was sent to resupply this location but was promptly fired upon. PGT Beauregard’s bombardment of this location began when Robert Anderson’s (*) Union troops refused to vacate their defenses in Charleston harbor. For ten points, name this South Carolina fort whose seizure in 1861 marked the beginning of the Civil War.
Answer: Fort Sumter

4452. This man was demoted after he took the advice of the spy Yoshira and refused to attack. In a strait near Jindo Island, this man’s dozen ships fended off Todo Takatora’s much larger fleet. This man was killed by a stray arquebus bullet in the Battle of Noryang, during the later stages of the Imjin War. This admiral lost no ships in the Battle of Myeongnyang. Turtle ships defended the Joseon kingdom against Toyotomi Hideyoshi under, for ten points, what 16th century Korean naval commander?
Answer: Yi Sun-sin

4453. This man agreed to the Panchsheel Treaty and the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence with a country he called “brothers.” His “Forward Policy,” designed to create bases past the McMahon Line, led to a failed war with (+) China. This man was a rival of the leader of the Muslim League, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, and signed the London Page 7IHBB Asian Championships Bowl 2016-2017 Bowl Round 9 Declaration regarding his country’s status in the Commonwealth. The (*) Indian National Congress was once led by, for ten points, what follower of Mahatma Gandhi and first Prime Minister of India?
Answer: Jawaharlal Nehru BONUS: At what 217 BC battle did Hannibal’s entire army ambush Gaius Flaminius’ troops, killing him and 15,000 other Romans and requiring the adoption of the Fabian strategy? Battle of Lake Trasimene Page 8

4454. Bruce Hoffman’s “Inside [this activity]” describes the way in which it has been politicized by its victims. Alan Krueger’s 2007 study found that this activity was less likely to be carried out by those from an impoverished background. Examples of this activity include the Kunduz airlift in 2001, which was “state-sponsored” and led to a practitioner of this activity living in Abbottabad until 2011. For ten points, name this general term for intentional violence committed to achieve a political or ideological goal.
Answer: terrorism (

4455. In 1888, Karl Josef Bayer developed a process for refining the oxide of this element from bauxite; the smelting of this element is then typically done through the electrolytic Hall-Heroult process. This element is the most common metal found in the Earth’s crust and is crucial for aerospace technology. For ten points, name this lightweight metal with atomic number 13 that is used in soda cans.
Answer: aluminum (

4456. In this location, soapstone monoliths depict raptor-like “birds of heaven,” and houses in this site are made of mud bricks called daga. This city is legendarily conflated with the Palace of the Queen of Sheba. Decorative masonry used in a Conical Tower in this city lead to its Shona name meaning “houses of stone,” and parallel walls surrounding this city are known as the Great Enclosure. For ten points, name this “Great” city, built several centuries ago in Masvingo Province in its namesake African country.
Answer: Great Zimbabwe

4457. This country’s government was deposed in 1997 after a series of pyramid schemes that saw its population lose over $1 billion US dollars. This country’s national hero is the nobleman Skanderbeg who both served for and later fought against the Ottoman Empire. This country was led by Enver Hoxha in the Cold War who allied it with Maoist China as opposed to Soviet Russia. For ten points, name this country once led by King Zog from Tirana.
Answer: Albania

4458. This country was the home of UN Secretary General U Thant and its former capital was formerly known as Rangoon. For ten points, name this country whose government controversially approved plans for dams on the Irrawaddy River in Southeast Asia.
Answer: Myanmar or Burma

4459. This ruler’s bid for power was supported by Mucianus, the governor of Syria. This ruler worked with Agricola in the pacification of Britain, and he became the patron of historian Josephus, who he met while suppressing the Great Jewish Revolt. Shortly after the death of Nero, this man succeeded Vitellius to end the Year of the Four Emperors. For ten points, name this father of Titus and founder of the Flavian dynasty.
Answer: Vespasian (or Titus Flavius Vespasianus; do not

4460. A storm in this ocean threw the Apung ship 2 miles inland, where it is now a tourist attraction. This ocean's atoll of Diego Garcia had its populace forcibly removed by the UK and United States in order to build a military base there. The rise of this ocean's sea level was protested by a 2009 underwater cabinet meeting. The lack of an early warning system in this ocean worsened the death toll of a devastating 2004 tsunami in, for the point, what ocean in which Sri Lanka is located?
Answer: Indian Ocean (8) At this location, Ahmad Abdali’s forces defeated Sadashivrao Bhau, though the Durrani Empire opted to retreat regardless. After a victory at Tughlaqabad, Hemu was killed at a battle in this location when Bairam Khan moved to reconquer Delhi. At one battle in this location, one ruler used araba carts to maximize the effect of his artillery against Ibrahim Lodi. For ten points, name this site of a

4461. This man was demoted after he took the advice of the spy Yoshira and refused to attack. In a strait near Jindo Island, this man’s dozen ships fended off Todo Takatora’s much larger fleet. This man was killed by a stray arquebus bullet in the Battle of Noryang, during the later stages of the Imjin War. This admiral lost no ships in the Battle of Myeongnyang. Turtle ships defended the Joseon kingdom against Toyotomi Hideyoshi under, for ten points, what 16th century Korean naval commander?
Answer: Yi Sun-sin

4462. In 2010, this city’s Park Kultury metro stop was suicide-bombed by two women working for Doku Umarov. Special forces were criticized for indiscriminately killing 130 civilians with poison gas while trying to resolve a hostage crisis in a theatre in this city. In 1999, FSB agents were accused of staging false flag apartment bombings upon this capital city in order to justify the Second Chechen War. For ten points, name this capital of the Russian Federation.
Answer: Moscow Second Quarter

4463. This man replaced his superior, Quintus Caecilius Metellus, as the commander of the expedition against Jugurtha. He decisively defeated the Cimbri and the Teutones while serving as consul, a position that he was elected to seven times. In an effort to minimize the baggage train, this man ordered his soldiers to carry their supplies on his back, earning them the nickname of this man’s mules. For ten points, name this Roman general, the first to recruit soldiers from the poor, one of his many reforms.
Answer: Gaius Marius BONUS: Marius’s rival late in life was this man, the first general to march on Rome. He instituted proscription to target his political enemies. Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix

4464. This scientist went to work at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions after he was forced to step down from his position at Caltech due to his antiwar positions. This man proposed an incorrect triple helix model for DNA and recommended treating the common cold and cancer with high dosages of Vitamin C. This scientist also introduced orbital hybridization and the electronegativity scale. For ten points, name this two time Nobel laureate.
Answer: Linus Pauling Page 2

4465. This government created a service of inspectors called metsuke to investigate corruption. Prior to the rule of this government, its second ruler disobeyed orders and fought the Sanada clan at Ueda Castle [oo-AY-da “castle”]. It created a policy of alternate attendance between the central court and the domains of each provincial lord. Until the Convention of Kanagawa, this government limited trade with China and Europe to the port city of Nagasaki via the sakoku law. Ieyasu founded, for ten points, what final Japanese shogunate that ruled until the Meiji Restoration?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (or Tokugawa Bakufu

4466. This country indicted Tatsuya Kato for his reporting of the aftermath of a 2013 disaster that killed 304 people, including numerous students from Danwon High School. Wikileaks released a 2007 diplomatic cable in which this country’s current president was accused of being under the control of a “Rasputin” like figure. Choi Soon-sil faces charges of influencing Park Geun-Hye, the president of, for ten points, what Asian country where protesters against Park flooded the streets of Seoul?
Answer: South Korea (or Republic of Korea) BONUS: The aforementioned

4467. This leader was beaten despite the actions of the king Prasutagus, who had betrothed his land to Claudius. The Ninth Legion was destroyed by this leader’s forces, along with the allied Trinovantes people. While Suetonius was away campaigning, this leader started a revolt by attacking the colony at Camulodunum. This leader’s defeat at the Battle of Watling Street came after her sack of Londinium. For ten points, name this queen who launched a major revolt in Roman Britain.
Answer: Boudica [boo-duh-kuh] (or Boadicea) BONUS: Boudica and Prasutagus were rulers of this tribe in eastern Britain, near modern Suffolk. Iceni (or Eceni)

4468. Description acceptable. In 2010, Ronnie Lee Gardner opted to undergo this action in accordance with his “Mormon heritage.” Eddie Adams captured a photograph of this action about to be performed against Nguyen Van Lem, a Communist assassin, in 1968 in the streets of Saigon by a police general. When this action is done by a group of people, some may be randomly given blanks to diffuse the personal responsibility. For ten points, name this violent act of punishment often performed by a firing squad. Page 3IHBB Asian Championships Bowl 2016-2017 Bowl Round 8
Answer: shooting the condemned (

4469. This leader ordered the creation of Unit 101, which committed the Qibya massacre as a reprisal attack. In his later career, he became minister of defense after Pinhas Lavon was caught planning false- flag bombing attacks on Egypt. This leader authorized Operation Magic Carpet to relocate thousands of Yemeni and Ethiopian Jews. He merged the Irgun militia into the IDF to fight against the Arab League shortly after his country gained independence in 1948. For ten points, name the first prime minister of Israel.
Answer: David Ben-Gurion BONUS: After his career in politics, Ben-Gurion retired to one of these Israeli collectivist farms, many of which industrialized over the 20th century. A few hundred of these communities exist in Israel today. kibbutzim

4470. Claims that this man had been targeted by the Bulgarian secret service were investigated by the Mitrokhin Commission. During a visit to the Philippines, this man was targeted in the failed Bojinka plot; fourteen years earlier, this man survived an attack from a “Grey Wolf,” Mehmet Ali Agca [ah-jah]. This man, who encouraged the Solidarity movement in a 1979 speech in Warsaw, succeeded a similarly named pontiff who lasted only thirty three days in office. For ten points, name this Polish pope who was canonized in 2014
Answer: Pope Saint John Paul II (or Karol Jozef Wojtyla [voy-twah]

4471. Kingdom that Alexander the Great ruled, to the north of classical Greece.
Answer: Kingdom of Macedon (

4472. Tutor of Alexander, a student of Plato.
Answer: Aristotle

4473. Large pachyderms he fought against at the Hydaspes River which Hannibal also employed.
Answer: Elephants

4474. Empire to the east that Alexander the Great conquered. It used a system of local government called satrapies.
Answer: Persian Empire (or Achaemenid Empire)

4475. Rival leader of that empire, who was killed after Alexander won at Gaugamela.
Answer: Darius III (

4476. His mother, whose womb was legendarily struck by a thunderbolt before Alexander’s birth
Answer: Olympias

4477. His horse, whom he later named a city after.
Answer: Bucephalus

4478. Decisive victory for Alexander in 333 fought near the northeastern tip of the Mediterranean.
Answer: Battle of Issus The Bubonic Plague Name the...

4479. Color used to describe the Bubonic Plague’s “death.”
Answer: black (

4480. Flea-laden rodents that spread the plague by stowing away in ships.
Answer: rats

4481. People that helped spread the disease while conquering the largest contiguous empire in history.
Answer: Mongols

4482. Political system between lords and vassals that declined in part due to the plague.
Answer: feudalism (or manorialism

4483. Italian island where the plague first reached Europe in the port of Messina.
Answer: Sicily

4484. Collection of tales by Boccaccio told by Florentines fleeing the plague
Answer: Decameron

4485. Within two, the year in which the plague is though to have entered Europe in the Crimea
Answer: 1347 (

4486. Scientific name of the plague-causing bacteria.
Answer: yersinia pestis (or Y. pestis) Page 5

4487. 1993: Former South African prisoner who was a co-recipient with F.W. de Klerk.
Answer: Nelson Mandela

4488. 2009: President who won, according to cynics, mostly for not being George W. Bush
Answer: Barack Obama

4489. 2014: Pakistani teenage activist for education of girls.
Answer: Malala Yousafzai (

4490. 2001: Global diplomatic organization then led by co-winner, Secretary General Kofi Annan.
Answer: United Nations

4491. 1991: Burmese democratic activist, under house arrest at the time of the award.
Answer: Aung San Suu Kyi [chee]

4492. 2011: Liberian President and women’s rights activist.
Answer: Ellen Johnson Sirleaf

4493. 1901: organization founded by one of the first winners, Henry Dunant.
Answer: Inter

4494. 2015: Country where a National Dialogue Quartet worked for democratic change after the Jasmine Revolution.
Answer: Tunisia (

4495. This leader’s Anti-Radical Decree prevented communists from taking jobs as teachers. In the midst of negotiating the boundaries of the Oder-Neisse line with Poland, this leader performed the kniefall [”kneefall”] in front of a (+) monument to victims of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. This Social Democrat was forced to resign when his aide, Gunter Guillaume [ghee- ohm], was revealed to be a (*) Stasi agent from a neighboring country. For ten points, name this West German chancellor who won the 1971 Nobel Peace Prize for his practice of ostpolitik.
Answer: Willy Brandt

4496. This man hosted a religious debate at his castle of Azuchi, which he built to defend the capital. He used arquebuses against a cavalry attack at the Battle of Nagashino, and he defeated an Imagawa attack into his territory at the Battle of (+) Okehazama. After the treachery of Akechi Mitsuhide, this man was forced to commit suicide in the Incident of Honnoji. (*) Toyotomi Hideyoshi succeeded, for ten points, which daimyo who overthrew the Ashikaga Shogunate, the first “Great Unifier” of Japan during the Sengoku period?
Answer: Oda Nobunaga

4497. In 1853, Richard Francis Burton visited this city, having spent months preparing his disguise. This city was recaptured from the Ottomans in July 1916, after which T.E. Lawrence was sent to assist the new Kingdom of Hejaz continue the (+) Arab Revolt. Wahhabist rule has threatened historic structures in this city; for example, a Hilton hotel was built over the house of (*) Abu Bakr, the first Islamic caliph. For ten points, name this Saudi Arabian city, home of the Masjid al- Haram and holiest city of Islam.
Answer: Mecca Page 6

4498. In this battle, the Atago sank in Palawan Passage after a torpedo attack by the USS Darter. During this battle, the phrase “the world wonders” was added to an encrypted message to throw off codebreakers, but accidentally delivered to the American admiral; as a result of that and other miscommunications, Thomas (+) Kinkaid’s Seventh Fleet asked, but did not receive, help from Willam Halsey’s Third Fleet during this battle. The first series of organized (*) kamikaze attacks took place during, for ten points, what October 1944 battle fought in the waters off Luzon, the largest naval battle of World War II?
Answer: Battle of Leyte Gulf

4499. This man claimed that using body doubles as a security measure was “movie magic, not reality” in a conversation with George Piro. Piro’s interrogation of this man, described as “High Value Detainee #1,” found he held (+) no links with al-Qaeda or interest in creating an Islamic state. Nine months after a “shock and awe” campaign began, this man was discovered in a (*) “spider hole” on a farm near Tikrit in December 2003. For ten points, name this Ba’ath Party leader who was hanged in December 2006 for crimes against humanity carried out as President of Iraq.
Answer: Saddam Hussein (

4500. The court of this king resolved a disputation in which Nicholas Donin pressed charges of blasphemy against the Talmud. This king allowed Henry III to keep his conquests in Aquitaine despite defeating him at (+) Taillebourg. During a campaign, this king was captured by the troops of Baibars and Qutuz. Damietta was given to the Mamluks in exchange for the release of this king following the Battle of Al-Mansurah. This king died of dysentery in modern-day (*) Tunisia while leading the Eighth Crusade. For ten points, name this only French monarch to be canonized.
Answer: Louis IX (or Saint Louis

4501. The cameraman Max Stahl helped expose troops from this country who had fired on protesters at a cemetery in Santa Cruz. This country initiated the Konfrontasi standoff to prevent an amalgamation of neighboring states to its west. (+) Mohammed Hatta helped this country secure its independence from the Netherlands in 1949. The principles of pancasila inspired this country’s (*) “New Order,” which replaced the idea of “Guided Democracy.” For ten points, name this Southeast Asian country whose president Suharto invaded East Timor.
Answer: Indonesia

4502. This party requires its candidates to not have any criminal records; its founder was found guilty of manslaughter in 1980, so he cannot run for office. To encourage direct democracy, this party launched the “Rousseau” (+) web app for discussion and votes on policy. This party led the “No” movement against a 2016 constitutional referendum that would have reformed the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, leading to (*) Matteo Renzi’s resignation. Virginia Raggi, the mayor of Rome, is a member of, for ten points, what Italian populist party that was founded by former comedian Beppe Grillo?
Answer: Five Star Movement (or Movimento 5 Stelle or M5S)

4503. A shipment of arms to this group aboard the Eksund was intercepted by the French and discovered to have been sent by Muammar Gaddafi. Bobby Sands died in a hunger strike protesting the lack of prison rights afforded to members of this group, which began to disarm after Sinn Fein [shin fayn] signed the Good Friday Accords with Tony Blair. For ten points, name this paramilitary group that during The Troubles fought for a united Ireland.
Answer: Provisional Irish Republican Army (or PIRA)

4504. This man gained a nickname after he insulted Frank Galluccio’s sister and was attacked. Frankie Yale mentored this man, an opponent of Adelard Cunin and the target of Eliot Ness’ Untouchables unit. Though this man’s agents attempted to kill Bugs Moran during the Saint Valentine’s Day massacre, this man was ultimately jailed for tax evasion. For ten points, name this Prohibition-era gangster, known as Scarface, who led the 1920s era Chicago Outfit.
Answer: Alphonse “Al” Capone (

4505. This first editor of the journal Modern Times popularized the phrase “existence precedes essence” in his Existentialism and Humanism, which rejected deterministic excuses for behavior. This philosopher popularized the idea that there are “two modes of consciousness,” and that “bad faith” forces human beings to adopt false values, in his Being and Nothingness. For ten points, name this French post-war philosopher and Nobel Laureate who was married to Simone de Beauvoir.
Answer: Jean-Paul Sartre

4506. A member of this family was targeted by the Soviet-backed Yanan Faction in the “Second Arduous March.” This family is honored on the “Day of the Sun.” A member of this family instituted the “Juche” [joo-chay] policy of self-reliance and took the title of “Eternal President,” while another member of this family allegedly ordered a hacking of Sony after he was unfavorably depicted in The Interview. Il- Sung, Jong-Il, and Jong-Un are members of, for ten points, what family that rules North Korea?
Answer: Kim family

4507. This scientist discovered that stereoisomers of tartaric acid rotate polarized light in opposite directions. He saved the silk industry in his country by determining that silkworms were dying from an infectious disease called flacherie. This scientist was able to save Joseph Meister from a dog bite due to his research into a vaccine for rabies. For ten points, name this French scientist whose namesake process removes harmful microorganisms from milk.
Answer: Louis Pasteur

4508. Major cities in this country were seized by Yahya Khan’s troops during Operation Searchlight in an attempt to prevent the Awami League from taking power. In 1971, George Harrison organized the world’s first benefit concert to support this country, which was suffering a genocide during its war of independence from Pakistan. For ten points, name this country, now an independent country with capital Dhaka.
Answer: Bangladesh (

4509. As a result of this treaty, Portugal regained Colonia do Sacramento in Uruguay. This treaty forced North American tribes formerly loyal to France to open trade with all nations. Britain increased its hold on the slave market when it was given the asiento in this treaty. Philip, duke of Anjou, renounced his claim to the French throne as a result of, for ten points, what treaty that ended the War of the Spanish Succession?
Answer: Treaty of Utrecht

4510. This group regularly held meetings at the Menger Hotel Bar of San Antonio. After the Battle of Las Guasimas, the doctor Leonard Wood ceased to be the leader of this group, which presented a president with a bronze miniature of Remington’s Bronco Buster. In their most famous engagement, this group charged up the Kettle and San Juan Hills in Cuba. For ten points, name this volunteer cavalry unit that was led by Teddy Roosevelt during the Spanish American War.
Answer: Rough Riders (or the 1st United

4511. Edward Nkoloso trained people in this occupation by rolling them down hills in oil drums in Zambia. Yang Liwei’s work in this occupation as part of the Shenzhou project culminated in 2003. Ilan Ramon became the first Israeli citizen to carry out this job. In 1962, the citizens of Perth, Australia turned on their lights to honor an American in this occupation passing overhead. For ten points, name this occupation held by the Mercury Seven, including John Glenn, many of whom rode Saturn V [five] rockets into space.
Answer: astronauts (

4512. This prime minister fired Srinivas Kumar Sinha because he refused to plan an attack against Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale; that attack eventually included the shelling of the Harmandir Sahib and was codenamed Operation Blue Star. In retaliation for that attack on Amritsar, this leader's Sikh bodyguards assassinated her in 1984. For ten points, name this Indian prime minister, the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru.
Answer: Indira Gandhi Second Quarter

4513. The losing side of this war used an encirclement technique called motti. The winners of this war were able to lease a naval base at Hanko and occupy the city of Vyborg. Its victors suffered heavy losses due to the effects of the Great Purge. The losers were forced to cede Karelia after the fall of the Mannerheim Line, despite the use of ski troops. The Continuation War followed, for ten points, what conflict between Finland and the Soviet Union, simultaneous with the start of World War II?
Answer: Winter War BONUS: Finnish troops in the Winter War developed a makeshift anti-tank weapon named for this man, the Soviet foreign minister. Vyacheslav Molotov (

4514. This country controls an archipelago with capital Funchal that is known for a variety of fortified wine. This country’s second-largest city sits at the mouth of the Douro River and lends its name to another fortified wine. This country transferred control of its Macau colony to China in 1999. Porto and the Madeiras are found in this nation, which is largely coextensive with the Roman province of Lusitania. For ten points, name this country with capital at Lisbon, which shares the Iberian Peninsula with Spain.
Answer: Portugal (or Portuguese Republic) BONUS: In addition to Madeira, Portugal also controls this other Atlantic archipelago, including the islands of Santa Maria and Terceira. It was discovered in an expedition sponsored by Henry the Navigator. Azores

4515. This man tried to force Richard Corbin to pay for gunpowder that had been seized by Lord Dunmore. Thanks to a speech noting that “Caesar had his Brutus; Charles I his Cromwell,” this man was accused of treason towards George III. In another speech, this man asked “is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and liberty?” For ten points, name this Virginian Founding Father who declared “Give me liberty or give me death!”
Answer: Patrick Henry BONUS: Patrick Henry’s treasonous speech was given within his first two weeks as a member of this Virginian legislative body. House of Burgesses

4516. This party launched the Chakrabarti Inquiry after several of its own members made anti-Semitic statements. CCTV footage showed this party’s leader walking past available train seats in order to show that rail privatization has led to a shortage of space. Owen Smith lost this party’s 2016 leadership election, which was triggered after a vote of no confidence following Brexit. For ten points, name this party led by Jeremy Corbyn, the current opposition party in the British House of Commons.
Answer: Labour Party of the United Kingdom BONUS: Owen Smith received support for the Labour leadership from this former leader of the Labour Party. He stepped down after the Tories won the

4517. Laws enacted during this period included tax reform that returned land to the government and the replacement of the han system with prefectures. A group of reforms during this period were outlined in the Charter Oath. In this period, a group of daimyo fought the Boshin War against the government, and the Satsuma Rebellion was launched by discontented samurai. For ten points, name this period of 19th century modernization in Japan in which the emperor was restored to power.
Answer: Meiji Restoration (

4518. This man began his “New Course” by appointing Leo von Caprivi as chancellor. He flew into a rage during an interview with the Daily Telegraph and sent the gunboat Panther to start the Agadir Crisis. This man replaced Helmuth von Moltke the Younger with Erich von Falkenhayn after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan. This grandson of Victoria supported Austria after the death of Franz Ferdinand and dismissed Otto von Bismarck. For ten points, name this last Kaiser of Germany, who ruled during World War I.
Answer: Wilhelm II (or William II) BONUS: Wilhelm II appointed this man Chief of the General Staff in the second half of World War I. He later served as president of the Weimar Republic. Paul von Hindenburg

4519. This character says “It is always better / to avenge dear ones than to indulge in mourning” to a grieving friend after the death of a man whose name translates as “ash army.” This character once lost a week-long swimming contest to his friend Breca. This man, who dies in combat with a dragon, is the subject of a poem that was translated by Seamus Heaney. For ten points, name this hero who kills Grendel and Grendel’s mother in an Old English epic poem.
Answer: Beowulf BONUS: This author claimed that the value of Beowulf as poetry, rather than as a historical document, had been overlooked in the English literary tradition in his lecture Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics. J.R.R. Tolkien (or John Ronald Reuen Tolkien)

4520. This country contains a natural gas fire known as Yanar Dag, and is home to Neft Daslari, or Oil Rocks, the first offshore drilling platform in the world. This country controls the exclave of Nakhchivan and fought a war with its western neighbor that ended with the Bishkek Protocol. It is home to the lowest-lying national capital in the world, which sits on the Absheron Peninsula in the Caspian Sea. Baku is the capital of, for ten points, what post-Soviet state that fought a war with Armenia?
Answer: Republic of Azerbaijan BONUS: Calling itself the Republic of Artsakh, this region is officially part of Azerbaijan but is controlled by ethnically Armenian separatists. Nagorno-Karabakh Third Quarter The categories are ...

4521. Industry that was a source of the Medici wealth, as well as that of the Rothschild and Fugger families.
Answer: banking (

4522. “Magnificent” member of the Medici family who patronized Botticelli and Michelangelo.
Answer: Lorenzo the Magnificent

4523. Tuscan capital city that was the primary seat of the Medici family
Answer: Florence or Firenze

4524. Conspiracy that targeted Giuliano de Medici for death. It was sponsored by Sixtus IV.
Answer: Pazzi Conspiracy

4525. Medici Queen of France, the wife of Henry II.
Answer: Catherine de’ Medici

4526. Rival family in Renaissance Italy whose members included Cesare (CHAY-sar-ay) and Lucrezia
Answer: Borgia

4527. Name of the first Medici to be named Grand Duke of Tuscany, named the elder.
Answer: Cosimo de Medici

4528. Revolt of unhappy wool workers put down by Salvestro de’ Medici.
Answer: Revolt of the Ciompi [chomp-ee] Robert Walpole Name the...

4529. Position, the head of the British government, that Walpole was the first to hold in 1721.
Answer: Prime Minister (

4530. Name shared by the two British monarchs served by Walpole, the first two to take the name.
Answer: George (I and/or II)

4531. Prominent tower where Walpole was imprisoned by his political enemies.
Answer: Tower of London

4532. Residence that Walpole bequeathed to his political successors.
Answer: 10 Downing Street

4533. Political party to which Walpole belonged. They opposed the Tories and the concept of absolute monarchy.
Answer: Whig Party

4534. Position held by Walpole as a junior minister, equivalent to America’s Secretary of the Treasury.
Answer: Chancellor of the Exchequer

4535. Credit bubble that occurred during Walpole’s rule, as a joint-stock company for trade in South America crashed.
Answer: South Sea Bubble

4536. Political subdivision that elected Walpole to Parliament. Walpole’s was a “pocket” kind, where he controlled over half the voters in the subdivision.
Answer: (pocket) borough Page 5

4537. British-controlled waterway connecting the Mediterranean and Red Seas, an essential target in North Africa.
Answer: Suez Canal

4538. Country that sent the Afrika Korps to fight in North Africa but was forced to retreat to allied Italy.
Answer: Nazi Germany

4539. Commander of the Afrika Korps who gained the nickname “Desert Fox” for his success in Africa.
Answer: Erwin Rommel

4540. Final British commander in North Africa. His Eighth Army won the Battle of El Alamein.
Answer: Bernard Law Montgomery

4541. British island with capital Valetta where submarines and airplanes targeted enemy shipping in the Mediterranean.
Answer: Malta

4542. Mediterranean island targeted by Operation Husky, which was launched from North Africa.
Answer: Sicily

4543. Operation name for the Anglo-American invasion of North Africa, which landed in French-held territory in November 1942.
Answer: Operation Torch (

4544. Vital harbor lost by the British after the Battle of Gazala. Its defenders became known as the Desert Rats.
Answer: Tobruk Fourth Quarter

4545. The first Boeing 747 to suffer an accident was this airline’s Flight 540 in 1974; 55 people died in Kenya in its worst disaster. In 1977, one of this airline’s planes was stormed by members of GSG 9, ending a hostage crisis by Palestinian hijackers who wanted the release of members of the Red Army (+) Faction. In 1972, another of this airline’s planes was hijacked, leading to the release of three members of Black September who committed the Munich massacre. (*) Cologne serves as headquarters for, for ten points, what largest German airline?
Answer: Deutsche Lufthansa AG

4546. This man and William Pinkney produced a never-ratified agreement to extend Jay’s Treaty. This man provoked a controversy by allowing Andrew Jackson to cross international borders during the (+) Seminole War. William Plumer voted for Richard Rush and John Quincy Adams instead of Daniel Tompkins and this man, becoming the only elector to vote against him in 1820. The Era of Good (*) Feelings was led by, for ten points, what President who protected Latin America from European interference with a famous doctrine?
Answer: James Monroe Page 6

4547. Shortly after this city was defeated at Tebas, its king Yusuf I requested aid from the Marinids to fight the Battle of Tarifa. When this city’s king Boabdil was forced into exile, he allegedly looked back wistfully at this city at a mountain pass now known as the (+) “Moor’s sigh.” The Nasrids established a kingdom in this city shortly after the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa. This city’s (*) Alhambra fortress was captured during the Reconquista. For ten points, name this city, the former capital of a Muslim emirate in southern Spain.
Answer: Granada

4548. The USS Panay sank after evacuating survivors from this city. Prince Asuka was given immunity for events in this city, which was captured by the army of Matsui Iwane. A (+) safe zone in this city was created by John Rabe, a German businessman, saving thousands of lives. This capital of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and the (*) Republic of China was the site of a contest to kill 100 civilians with a sword and other such war crimes. For ten points, name this Chinese city that, in 1937, was subjected to a “rape” by invading Japanese forces.
Answer: Nanking (or Nanjing

4549. States in this era were grouped into Vertical or Horizontal alliances based on their stance towards the most powerful state. A flourishing of philosophy called the Hundred (+) Schools of Thought ended with this period. It began after the breakup of the Jin state and occurred during the Eastern Zhou period. This period came after a time of smaller states known as the (*) Spring and Autumn Period. The great works of Confucianism were compiled during, for ten points, what period of Chinese history that ended when Qin Shi Huangdi unified China?
Answer: Warring

4550. Johannes Ockeghem wrote the first surviving polyphonic example of this composition. Berlioz wrote one of these pieces with four brass bands to commemorate the July Revolution. These pieces normally feature a (+) hymn attributed to Thomas of Celano. Another of these pieces includes a trombone solo in its “Tuba Mirum” section and was completed by Franz (*) Sussmayr after its composer died while working on its “Lacrimosa.” A “Dies Irae” is usually found in, for ten points, what type of composition that was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s last, a mass for the dead?
Answer: requiems (or requiem mass)

4551. After this man’s citizen militia fled, the Spanish sacked the city of Prato in 1512, ending the rule of Piero Soderini. This man wrote that “because Fortune is a (+) woman, one must thrash her to have one’s way with her,” and he discussed the first 10 books of the History of Rome in his Discourses on Livy. Another work by this author views Cesare Borgia as a model (*) ruler, claims that it is better to be feared than to be loved. and was dedicated to Lorenzo d’Medici. For ten points, name this Italian author of The Prince.
Answer: Niccolo Machiavelli Page 7

4552. This man ended a mutiny by declaring to his men “I am waiting for the tanks and the Americans” before launching another attack. After Erich von Falkenhayn declared that he would bleed this man’s troops (+) white in one battle, this man allegedly rallied his men with the cry “they shall not pass.” The “Sacred Way” supply line was established by this (*) marshal, who worked with Pierre Laval in a post-military position that earned him life imprisonment. For ten points, name this war hero at Verdun who collaborated with the Nazis as the head of Vichy France.
Answer: (Henri-)Philippe Petain

4553. This commodity partially titles a historiography by Allan Kulikoff that argues that its production created a caste system, partially because it involved a gang system rather than a task system. Glasgow merchants who imported this commodity from the (+) American colonies were referred to as its namesake “lords.” This primary cash commodity of colonial (*) Virginia and North Carolina was first commercially raised in North America by John Rolfe in the early 1600s. For ten points, name this crop whose leaves are used to form cigars.
Answer: tobacco (

4554. Pope Alexander II allegedly gave a papal banner to the winner of this battle as a sign of support. The losing side in this battle had earlier been forced to face Harald Hardrada at Stamford Bridge. The housecarls took a defensive position upon the Senlac Hill during this battle, though they could not prevent Harold Godwinson from being hit in the eye by an arrow, as depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry. For ten points, name this 1066 victory for William the Conqueror.
Answer: Battle of Hastings

4555. One of these figures replicated the enemy’s crest on the lanterns of his troops to gain entrance into that enemy’s army. A famous person of this type nicknamed “Devil” led his lord to safety through Iga province. Hattori Hanzo was a member of this profession, also known as shinobi, who served Tokugawa Ieyasu. For ten points, name these stealthy mercenaries from feudal Japan.
Answer: ninja (

4556. An important action early in this war was the use of air strikes to drive back an attack on the city of Khafji. Northern and southern no-fly zones were established at the 32nd and 36th parallels after this war, in which the losing side’s retreating columns were decimated in the Highway of Death. For ten points, name this 1991 war in which coalition forces liberated Kuwait from Iraqi control.
Answer: First Gulf War (

4557. This country was known as French Sudan in the colonial era and it entered into a short-lived federation with Senegal in 1960. A recent Tuareg rebellion in the north of this country proclaimed the state of Azawad with its capital at Gao. This country is named for an empire that was founded by Sundiata. The Ghana Empire once ruled in what is now, for ten points, what arid West African country, the home of Timbuktu and Bamako?
Answer: Republic of Mali

4558. Description acceptable. Stephen Roberts’ “historical induction” argument argues against this philosophical position. Alvin Plantinga argues for this philosophical position based on neo-Aristotelian models of modal logic. The “Ultimate Boeing 747 Gambit” was used to attack the watchmaker argument for this position by Richard Dawkins, one of the “Four Horsemen” who fought against it. Atheists reject, for ten points, what belief in the presence of a deity?
Answer: the existence of God (

4559. Because of a mistake made during this activity, Andres Escobar was murdered outside of a bar in 1994. A one-week war named for this activity began with a bombing raid conducted by passenger aircraft and was fought between El Salvador and Honduras. While performing this activity, Diego Maradona executed a controversial, “miraculous” feat dubbed the Hand of God. The 2018 and 2022 world championships of this activity will be held in Russia and, controversially, Qatar, thanks to FIFA bribery. For ten points, name this sport played by Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi.
Answer: association football (or soccer; do not

4560. The action of raising the djed [jed] was performed to honor them at a celebration sometimes called the Feast of the Tail. That event, the Heb Sed, allowed one of these figures to establish the Amarna heresy. They were the pre-eminent preservers of the fundamental order of the universe, a concept known as Maat. One of these people mandated worship of a sun-disk known as Aten, and concurrently changed his own name to Akhenaten. For ten points, name these semi-divine rulers of ancient Egypt.
Answer: ancient Egyptian pharaohs

4561. This ruler put down a revolt in Ghent against his sister, Mary of Hungary. The Battle of Villalar was one episode in an uprising against this man called the Revolt of the Comuneros. His army captured Francis I at the Battle of Pavia, and he condemned Martin Luther at the Diet of Worms. For ten points, name this man who ruled as Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain.
Answer: Charles V (

4562. This group’s Comrade Duch ran a high school-turned-prison camp known as S-21. This group gained support after allying with Norodom Sihanouk in an attempt to overthrow Lon Nol. After escaping this group, Dith Pran exposed their policy of mass murder in the “killing fields.” Under Pol Pot, this group attempted to transform its country into an agrarian society. For ten points, name this Communist regime that briefly controlled Cambodia.
Answer: Khmer Rouge

4563. In 1899, four reporters from Denver published a fake news story claiming that Americans were to replace this object with a road. William Pogue claimed to have seen this entity from low Earth orbit, before realizing that he was actually looking at the Grand Canal. For ten points, name this entity that cannot actually be seen from space with the unaided eye, a massive set of fortifications that started protecting against Mongol invasion in the third century BC.
Answer: Great Wall of China (

4564. This leader ordered bishops to be burned at the stake as part of the Heresy Acts and made Reginald Pole Archbishop of Canterbury and principal advisor. Her marriage to Philip II and her Catholicism led to severe dissent among her subjects. For ten points, name this daughter of Henry VIII and sister of Elizabeth, a Queen noted for her many executions.
Answer: Mary I (or Bloody Mary or Mary Tudor

4565. An abandoned city in this country is centered on an “Avenue of the Dead” and is home to a fresco showing a ritual blood-letting. The sites of San Lorenzo and La Venta in this country included depictions of jaguars and ball courts. The Codex Mendoza shows the founding of an empire’s capital city near Lake Texcoco in this country. For ten points, name this modern country, the home of the Olmec and Aztec civilizations.
Answer: Mexico Page 2

4566. This man was a member of the Free Officers Movement that overthrew King Farouk and created the Mukhabarat secret police. This man was one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement and joined his country with Syria into the United Arab Republic. He faced an invasion by Britain, France, and Israel after his nationalization of the Suez Canal. For ten points, name this first President of Egypt.
Answer: Gamal Abdel Nasser BONUS: To protect shipping near the Bab-el-Mandeb, Nasser supported the republicans in a civil war in this country. This country began reunification in

4567. The Royal Navy ship HMS Amethyst was trapped on this river for several months in 1949. A 1954 flood of this river devastated Hubei Province, and a series of canyons along its banks are the site of a project that displaced 1.3 million people and started producing power in 2003. This river is referred to in its native country as Chang Jiang. The Three Gorges Dam was built on, for ten points, what Chinese river that empties into the sea near Shanghai?
Answer: Yangtze River (or Chang Jiang before mentioned) BONUS: The baiji was a species of this animal that once dwelled in the Yangtze River. It was not found during a

4568. In response to revelations regarding NSA surveillance, this country’s leader said that “the Internet is uncharted territory for us all.” Former President of European Parliament Martin Schulz announced his intentions to run as the Social Democratic Candidate in October 2017 elections in this country. Recep Erdogan [aird-oh-wan] accused this country of “Nazi practices” after pro-Erdogan rallies were cancelled in Nordrhein-Westfalen. For ten points, name this country led by the Christian Democratic Union under Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland) BONUS: Another German political party running in the October

4569. During a protest in this city organized by Vanessa Wruble, this city’s police force made no arrests. Sean Spicer’s description of another event in this city used “alternative facts,” according to Kellyanne Conway on Meet the Press. This city’s Metro system saw its ridership decrease, compared to a normal weekday, by 10% on January 20th, 2017. For ten points, name this city that hosted a Women’s March the day after hosting Donald Trump’s poorly-attended inauguration.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

4570. This man supported the role of the Church by passing the Falloux [fall-ooh] Laws to reform schools. This ruler launched a failed coup at Strasbourg and was imprisoned in a fortress at Ham. This man, who was opposed by Adolphe Thiers in the National Assembly, sought to protect Constantinople by starting the Crimean War and was captured in 1870 at the Battle of Sedan during a disastrous defeat to Prussia. For ten points, name this final Emperor of France.
Answer: Napoleon III (or Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte; do not

4571. The US Marines incorporated this game into an ad with the caption “Get off the firing line [...] that’s a safety violation!” Norwegian Prime Minister Erna Solberg was photographed playing this game during a Parliament session. In a 2016 speech, Hillary Clinton attempted to capitalize on this game’s popularity with a Get Out the Vote pun. Nintendo’s stock value surged by 120 percent in the week following the release of, for ten points, what Niantic mobile game in which users may find a Pikachu while taking a walk?
Answer: Pokemon Go (

4572. Country that Thatcher led in the 1980s.
Answer: United Kingdom (or Great Britain or England)

4573. Political party led by Thatcher against the Labour Party.
Answer: Conservative and Unionist Party (or Tory Party)

4574. Russian leader whom she praised, saying “we can do business together” in 1984.
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

4575. Drink that Thatcher was accused of “snatching” from poor children as Education Secretary.
Answer: milk

4576. Industry that went on a failed strike in the winter of 1984 under the leadership of Arthur Scargill.
Answer: coal mining (

4577. Method used by Thatcher to force an election in 1979. Passing this motion in Parliament forces the government to call a new election.
Answer: vote/motion of no confidence

4578. Chancellor of the Exchequer under Thatcher and her successor as Prime Minister.
Answer: John Major

4579. Assassination attempt by the IRA that Thatcher survived in October 1984.
Answer: Brighton hotel bombing Nicholas II Name the...

4580. Title held by Nicholas II as ruler of Russia.
Answer: tsar

4581. Conflict that Nicholas II died during, leading to the rise of the Soviet Union.
Answer: World War I

4582. Grandmother of Nicholas II, a long-lived Queen of Britain whose descendants married into many royal houses.
Answer: Queen Victoria

4583. Russian mystic whom Nicholas employed to treat his son’s hemophilia.
Answer: Grigori Rasputin

4584. Country that defeated Nicholas’s Russia at the Battle of Tsushima Straits.
Answer: Japan

4585. Dynastic house that Nicholas II belonged to. It began to rule Russia in 1613.
Answer: House of Romanov

4586. Legislature that Nicholas was forced to convene after the Revolution of 1905.
Answer: Duma

4587. Politician that headed the Provisional Government after the abdication of Nicholas and was overthrown by the Bolsheviks, beginning the October Revolution.
Answer: Alexander Kerensky Page 5

4588. Country that occupied Japan after World War II.
Answer: United

4589. Organization that Japan was prevented from having in its new constitution.
Answer: a military (

4590. Emperor that announced the Japanese surrender with the 1945 Jewel Voice Broadcast.
Answer: Hirohito (or Emperor Showa)

4591. Son of that emperor, who succeeded him and continues to rule.
Answer: Akihito

4592. Post-war Japanese industry, including Mitsubishi and Toyota, that rivals Detroit’s “Big 3.”
Answer: automobile industry (

4593. Major index on the Tokyo Stock Exchange that topped out at nearly 39,000 during the late 80s asset price bubble.
Answer: Nikkei 225 (

4594. Japanese author who led an attempted coup in 1970 before committing seppuku.
Answer: Yukio Mishima

4595. World’s largest battleship that Japan lost in 1945
Answer: Yamato Fourth Quarter

4596. This man massacred the crew of the Miri while attempting to force a treaty upon the Zamorin. Nicolau Coelho [ko-way-loh] delivered reports of this man’s successes to Manuel I after the Berrio managed to reach port faster than the flagship (+) Sao Gabriel. Under the sponsorship of Henry the Navigator, this man landed in (*) Calicut by following Bartolomeu Dias’ route around the Cape of Good Hope. For ten points, name this first European explorer to reach India by sea.
Answer: Vasco da Gama

4597. An equestrian statue of this city’s founder was camouflaged with sandbags to protect it during World War II and sits on the massive Thunder Stone. An institute for girls in this city was the site of the (+) Kirov assassination. Nevsky Prospekt is the main street of this city, which contains the Bronze Horseman and Smolny Isntitute. This city on the mouth of the (*) Neva River is home to the Winter Palace, which housed the tsar from 1732 to 1917. For ten points, name this city, which was known as Leningrad in the Soviet era.
Answer: St. Petersburg (

4598. The Morley-Minto reforms allowed this region to have a degree of self-governance. This region was divided into provinces and princely states and garrisoned by three Presidency armies. The (+) independence of this region was the subject of an agreement with Lord Irwin at a Round Table Conference, as well as the earlier Lucknow Pact. This region came under direct rule after the (*) Sepoy Mutiny and the dissolution of its ruling company. For ten points, name this former British colony ruled from Calcutta and New Delhi.
Answer: the (British) Raj (or British India) Page 6

4599. Forces loyal to this country started the Battle of Annaberg. This country rejected the Spa Conference by annexing Teschen and Zaolzie [zow’l-zhay]. This country held on the Kresy [kress- ay] region with help from the (+) Lwow [l’vov] Eaglets. One leader of this country promoted the idea of an Intermarium plan, which led to a war where this country (*) drew its border at the Curzon Line and stopped a Soviet advance in the Miracle on the Vistula. For ten points, name this country, which was divided by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union in 1939 and whose capital is Warsaw.
Answer: Poland

4600. In a propaganda poster published after this event, a woman with outstretched arms holds out a weapon underneath the caption “Take Up the Sword of Justice.” Broadway producer Charles Frohman was a victim of this event, as was Alfred Vanderbilt, who was last seen trying to save a (+) mother and child. Captain William Turner survived being swept overboard during this event, which occurred eleven miles off the (*) Irish coast and took only 18 minutes. Walther Schwieger’s U-boat caused, for ten points, what 1915 sinking of a British liner, an act of war that helped push the United States into World War I?
Answer: sinking of the RMS Lusitania (

4601. This man was able to capture Kimpo airfield after landings at Red, Blue, and Green beaches in Operation Chromite. This man was replaced by Matthew Ridgway, despite leading a difficult (+) landing at Inchon, after a series of disagreements with Harry Truman in the Korean War. In another conflict, this commander vowed “I (*) shall return” when the Japanese forced him to retreat from the Philippines. For ten points, name this American general who commanded Allied troops in the Pacific Theatre of World War II.
Answer: Douglas MacArthur

4602. The occurrence of one of these events during a battle between the Medes and the Lydians caused both sides to put down their weapons and declare peace. Certain predictions from Einstein’s theory of (+) general relativity were confirmed following Arthur Eddington’s observation of light deflection during one of these events in 1919. Historians have attempted to place the exact date of Good Friday by assuming that the (*) darkness described at Jesus’ crucifixion was one of these events. For ten points, name these events in which the moon passes between the Sun and the Earth.
Answer: solar eclipse (

4603. After this man added battering rams to his armies for a successful campaign, Anatolius negotiated peace with him on behalf of Theodosius. In one battle, this man’s camp was accidentally stumbled upon by (+) Thorismund. This man was finally defeated by Flavius Aetius and Theodoric I at the Catalaunian Plains. This brother of Bleda allegedly died of a nosebleed on the night of his marriage to a Gothic bride. (*) In 452, Pope Leo convinced this man to refrain from attacking Rome. For ten points, name this “Scourge of God,” a 5th-century ruler of the Huns.
Answer: Attila the Hun Page 7

4604. This man lost a statewide election after John Crittenden’s endorsement swung support to his rival. This man’s rival issued the Freeport Doctrine supporting popular sovereignty during a series of senatorial (+) debates; this man eventually lost that 1858 election in Illinois, but soundly defeated his rival, Stephen (*) Douglas, two years later in a Presidential election. For ten points, name this politician who thus led the United States into the Civil War.
Answer: Abraham Lincoln BONUS: A brutal civil war in this nation was known as La Violencia. It fought a guerilla war against FARC with the aid of the United

4605. In 1990, this country’s no-party Panchayat system was reformed by King Birendra. Gyanendra rose to power in this country after a 2001 massacre of the royal family. The April 2015 Gorkha earthquake killed over 9,000 people in this country, including 21 in an avalanche on Mount Everest. For ten points, name this Himalayan country with capital Kathmandu.
Answer: Nepal

4606. Sopwith Camels were equipped with two of these devices, often produced by Lewis. The capture of Roland Garros’ equipment helped German engineers develop synchronization gear, permitting these closed-bolt weapons to operate through the gaps of a spinning propeller. The Browning M1919 replaced many Vickers-produced examples of, for ten points, what weapons that were mounted on World War I-era aircraft and could fire hundreds of bullets per minute?
Answer: machine gun (

4607. In this country, Plinio Salgado founded the fascist Integralist party which was disbanded with all other political parties in 1937. Getulio Vargas, modernized this country’s economy as part of the Estado Novo. Lula da Silva led this country in the early 21st century, which also hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup. For ten points, name this South American country whose Old Republic was dominated by an oligarchy in Sao Paulo.
Answer: Brazil

4608. In a novel, Nicholas Branch is tasked with assembling information about this event, discovering the crippling dyslexia of the perpetrator. Permutations of this event are overseen by the Yellow Card Man in a 2011 Stephen King novel titled for the date of this event. This event, the subject of Libra and 11/22/63, was carried out from a school book depository in Dallas. For ten points, name this Presidential murder carried out by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Answer: assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy (or assassination of JFK

4609. In 2009, Karen Starko claimed that this event was made worse by the Surgeon General’s instruction to take aspirin. Woodrow Wilson nearly died in this event, which was first reported in the United States at Camp Funston in Fort Riley, Kansas. This event, which killed about five percent of the world’s population, was spread across the globe by soldiers near the end of World War I. For ten points, name this 1918 pandemic, commonly named for an Iberian country that didn’t censor the high death toll.
Answer: Spanish flu pandemic (

4610. A member of this party suggested introducing a “barbaric cultural practices tip line;” that politician, Kellie Leitch, is running for this party’s May 2017 leadership elections. Rona Ambrose is the current interim leader of this party after the October 2015 resignation of Stephen Harper. For ten points, name this Canadian political party that was removed from power by Justin Trudeau’s Liberals.
Answer: Conservative Party of Canada Page 1

4611. During this man’s reign, his forces broke a blockade of the Hanko Peninsula in the Battle of Gangut, his country’s first naval victory. A major victory during his reign was the capture of Azov. He reorganized his government with the Table of Ranks and defeated a revolt by the streltsy. He studied shipbuilding in the Netherlands as part of his Great Tour to learn more about Western Europe. For ten points, name this “Great” modernizing tsar of Russia.
Answer: Peter I (or Peter the Great; just Peter is needed after “Great” is said)

4612. Examples of this instrument include the Galician gaita and Italian zampogna, and George Buchanan claimed they were used instead of trumpets during battle starting in the mid-16th century. Contrary to legend, this musical instrument was not actually banned by the Proscription Act of 1746. The uilleann [ill-yin] variety of this instrument makes sound through drones and an unusually wide- ranging chanter and is popular in Ireland. A goatskin sac is used to store air in, for ten points, what instrument whose Great Highland variety is from Scotland?
Answer: bagpipes

4613. Legislation to undertake this project was introduced to Congress by Zadock Pratt. Thomas Durant helped finance this project, though scandal arose when Credit Mobilier attempted to overcharge a company for its construction. This project was completed when Leland Stanford drove in the golden spike at Promontory, linking the Union Pacific and Central Pacific lines. For ten points, name this man- made transportation route that connected the Western and Eastern United States.
Answer: Transcontinental Railroad

4614. One king of this name was opposed by Simon de Montfort and forced to sign the Provisions of Oxford, the first written constitution of his country. Another king of this name signed the Treaty of Wallingford to secure power and established the Plantagenet dynasty. The most famous king of this name fathered Elizabeth I and divorced Anne Boleyn in his search for a male heir. For ten points, give this name, held by eight English kings, the last of which had six wives.
Answer: Henry (

4615. This group was legally given power by the Lex Titia and was formed after the Battle of Mutina. One of its members was forced out after raising a large force to defeat Sextus in Sicily. This group launched proscriptions against prominent politicians like Cicero. One member of this group divorced another’s sister to ally himself with Cleopatra. For ten points, name this political alliance of the late Roman Republic that failed to stop a civil war between two of its members, Octavian and Mark Antony.
Answer: Second Triumvirate (

4616. This city feuded with Ercole d’Este (air-col-lay DESS-tay) over mines at Commachio in the Salt War. This city was first settled at Torcello by people fleeing the sack of Altinum by Atilla the Hun. Pope Julius II initially targeted this city in the War of the League of Cambrai, then allied with it against France. This city’s leader, Enrico Dandalo, convinced the Fourth Crusade to sack Zara and Constantinople. For ten points, name this Queen of the Adriatic, an Italian city famed for its canals.
Answer: (Most Serene) Republic of Venice BONUS: The Old Foundry in Venice’s Canaletto district was the site of the first of these places, in which Jews were forced to live. ghetto

4617. This empire was ruled by an Amorite dynasty until a sack by the Hittites and an occupation by the Kassites. This empire rivaled, then allied with, the Medians to their north. This empire was refounded after the death of the powerful Assyrian king Ashurbanipal. A law code that governed this empire contained the principle of “an eye for an eye,” and its capital city legendarily featured intricate hanging gardens. For ten points, name this Mesopotamian empire ruled by Hammurabi.
Answer: Babylonian Empire (

4618. The Hercynian Forest stretched eastward from this river in antiquity, and the Ubii lived along its banks. A crisis was sparked in 1840 when Adolph Thiers proposed this river as a border. This river shares a delta with the Scheldt and Meuse that was the site of heavy damage in the 1953 North Sea flood. A legendary rock known as Lorelei overlooks, for ten points, what major Western European river that, like the Danube, formed much of the northern border of the Roman Empire?
Answer: Rhine River BONUS: What city on the banks of the Rhine, founded by the Romans as the capital of Germania Inferior, is the fourth-largest in Germany and is home to a Gothic cathedral that was finally completed in

4619. Charles-Gilbert Romme created one of these for the French Republic in 1792, although it was abolished by the Catholic Church in the Concordat of 1801. That one of these things was later used for 18 days during the Paris Commune. Because one of these things wasn’t accepted in Russia until 1918, the February Revolution actually began in March. For ten points, name these temporal systems, including a Julian one that was reformed by Pope Gregory XIII.
Answer: calendars BONUS: As part of a push for standardization of units and measures during the French Revolution, the French Republican Calendar had this many days in a week and this many hours in a day. 10 Page 3

4620. This country was the site of the first coup d’etat broadcast over radio, which occurred after the success of Operation Weserubung. The fascist Nasjonal Samling party formed a collaboration government in this country under Vidkun Quisling. In 1940, paratroopers managed to capture this country’s city of Narvik in an attempt to control iron ore shipments from Sweden. For ten points, name this Scandinavian nation invaded by the Nazis, who occupied Oslo.
Answer: Norway BONUS: The disastrous Allied attempt to save Norway resulted in the resignation of this British prime minister, who claimed there would be “peace in our time” after the Munich Agreement with Hitler. Neville Chamberlain

4621. This man disfigured his left eyebrow after jumping out a window when his wife caught him in a room with a nurse. A helicopter operator supposedly heard “two loud booms” during the jet crash that took this man’s life. A training facility named after him is found in Star City. In April 1961, this man exclaimed “Poyekhali” after successfully leaving Site No. 1 at Baikonur during the Vostok 1 mission. For ten points, name this Russian cosmonaut who was the first human in space.
Answer: Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin BONUS: Another landmark Russian space traveler was Laika, an example of which animal, who on Sputnik 2, became the first animal to orbit Earth? Dog Third Quarter The categories are ...

4622. Capital city, where Carl XVI [16] Gustav has reigned since 1973.
Answer: Stockholm

4623. Country to the east that was dominated by Sweden until its annexation by Russia.
Answer: Finland

4624. Country to the south that fought with Sweden over the province of Scania.
Answer: Denmark

4625. Institution abolished by Magnus IV of Sweden. It resulted in a largely free peasant class, but Sweden still engaged in the African form of this institution until 1813.
Answer: slavery (or thralls)

4626. Religion of the Church of Sweden. It joined the Thirty Years’ War to help other followers of this religion in the Holy Roman Empire.
Answer: Lutheranism (

4627. Royal house that ruled Sweden with the ascension of Gustav I.
Answer: House of Vasa

4628. Union that joined Sweden with other Scandinavian countries under the reign of Margaret I.
Answer: Kalmar Union

4629. Swedish invasion of Poland-Lithuania in the 1650s by Charles X.
Answer: Deluge (or potop szwedzki or tvanas) Page 4

4630. This man and Engels published the Communist Manifesto.
Answer: Karl Marx

4631. This country’s constitutional monarchy, led by Louis XVIII [18], was overthrown.
Answer: France

4632. A series of revolutions in this modern-day country led to the election of the Frankfurt Parliament.
Answer: Germany

4633. A nationalist movement in Wallachia pushed for the creation of this country with capital at Bucharest.
Answer: Romania

4634. An independence war started in this country and ended a year later at the Siege of Buda.
Answer: Hungary

4635. The government of this nation rejected a constitution for its southern region of Schleswig-Holstein.
Answer: Denmark

4636. A federal constitution was created for this country, forcing cantons to give up some of their rights.
Answer: Switzerland

4637. A movement in Galicia pushed for the creation of this region and independence from the Austrian Empire.
Answer: Ukraine (or Ruthenia) Cuba Name the...

4638. Capital city of Cuba, where the USS Maine was sunk.
Answer: Havana

4639. Revolutionary who led Cuba through the second half of the 20th century. His brother, Raul, is currently president.
Answer: Fidel Castro

4640. Weapons stationed on Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1962 to threaten the United States.
Answer: ballistic missiles (

4641. Type of economic action taken by the United States to prevent trade with Cuba.
Answer: embargo

4642. Attempted 1961 invasion by CIA-backed rebels, driven off by the Cuban government.
Answer: Bay of Pigs Invasion (

4643. Marxist revolutionary, instrumental in the 1959 Cuban revolution, who also aided movements in the Congo and Bolivia.
Answer: Che Guevara (

4644. Dictator overthrown in the 1959 Cuban Revolution.
Answer: Fulgencio Batista

4645. 1901 amendment that granted the United States the right to dominate Cuban politics.
Answer: Platt Amendment Page 5

4646. This ruler’s forces were victorious at Kozludzha, allowing for an annexation of the Crimea in the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji. Disgruntled peasants attempted to overthrow this ruler in the (+) Pugachev revolt. Sham villages were allegedly constructed so that Grigory Potemkin could impress this ruler, who was brought to power in a coup against (*) her husband, Peter III. For ten points, name this patron of Denis Diderot and Voltaire, an enlightened tsarina of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II)

4647. A church in this country, Our Lady Mary of Zion, claims to hold the Ark of the Covenant. The easternmost portion of this country was invaded in the 1977 Ogaden War. Although this country’s largest ethnic group is the (+) Oromo, its official language, written with the Ge’ez script, is Amharic. Lake Tana, the source of the Blue Nile, is located in this country, which was once ruled by the communist (*) Derg regime and lost its Red Sea coastline in 1993. Eritrea declared independence from, for ten points, what East African country whose capital is Addis Ababa?
Answer: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

4648. The protagonist of this novel duels an officer after he perceives an insult to his wife at the English Club, then later obsesses over killing an enemy monarch who is occupying a foreign capital. This novel depicts the obese, one-eyed General (+) Kutuzov as a spiritual man who kneels in thanks before an icon. Princess Helene dies near the end of this book, which contains lengthy descriptions of the (*) Battles of Austerlitz and Borodino. For ten points, name this novel set during Napoleon’s invasion of Russia by Leo Tolstoy.
Answer: War and Peace (or Voyna i mir)

4649. A crucial battle leading to the end of this dynasty may have been fought near Chibi City. This dynasty, which earlier fought the Xiongnu barbarians, was briefly interrupted when the Liu family was overthrown by Wang Mang. The Celestial Masters launched the (+) Five Pecks of Rice revolt against this dynasty in an attempt to rid the world of decadence. The Yellow Turban Rebellion brought this dynasty to an end, leading to the (*) Three Kingdoms Period. Liu Bang founded, for ten points, what dynasty that shares its name with the predominant ethnicity in modern China?
Answer: Han dynasty

4650. An early proponent of this cause was mayor Neal Dow, who crafted the short-lived Maine Law. Wayne Wheeler pioneered “pressure politics” in support of this cause. Another advocate for this cause was known for using a (+) hatchet to destroy contraband. The Volstead Act provided legal backing to this cause, which was supported by Carrie Nation and a (*) Women’s Christian Union. For ten points, name this cause that became national policy with the passing of the 18th Amendment, then was revoked with the 21st Amendment.
Answer: temperance (or prohibition of alcohol

4651. This man’s strategy of using fortified burhs is documented in the Burghal Hidage. He called together an army at Egbert’s Stone in order to fight at Edington. This man forced the Treaty of (+) Wedmore upon one rival following the siege of Chippenham, ensuring that Guthrum converted to Christianity. The (*) Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was created during his reign. For ten points, name this king of Wessex, the only English monarch to be called “the Great.”
Answer: Alfred the Great

4652. The mother of two of these people asks a favor that angers the rest of this group. Two members of this group were dubbed Boanerges, or “sons of thunder.” On one occasion, a man estimates that this group needs at least 200 (+) denarii-worth of food. The treasurer of this group regularly stole from its funds and accompanied his teacher to the (*) Garden of Gethsemane before betraying him for thirty pieces of silver. For ten points, name this group of twelve men that Jesus called to ministry in the canonical gospels.
Answer: Twelve Apostles (or Twelve Disciples of Jesus)

4653. Alternatively called the Sinews of Peace, this speech claimed that, “from Stettin [...] to (*) Trieste,” the title construct had “descended across the continent.” For ten points, name this speech by Winston Churchill that coined a term for the dividing line between Soviet and non-Soviet spheres.
Answer: Iron Curtain speech (

4654. Alexander Neckham’s On the Nature of Things provides the earliest European account of these devices. The Dream Pool Essays describes how wax was attached to the center of a component of these devices that was then hung from a strain of (+) silk. These devices, which were originally used for divination in feng shui, are one of the Four Great Inventions of China, and they were adapted for (*) maritime use to provide direction during cloudy weather. For ten points, name this navigational device that contains a magnetic needle.
Answer: compass BONUS: What commodity was mined and sold by Cecil Rhodes’ De Beers company, which exploited African labor? diamonds (

4655. This country’s government published the 1995 report “Bringing Them Home”, detailing a genocidal 20th century campaign to remove native children from their homes. Though reconciliation efforts of the “Stolen Generations” included “National Sorry Day” in 1998, it wasn’t until John Howard was succeeded by Kevin Rudd that this country’s Prime Minister apologized. For ten points, name this country where hundreds of thousands of Aboriginal children were kidnapped by a government based in Canberra.
Answer: Australia

4656. This man rose to prominence as a subordinate of John Jervis (JAR-vis) at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent. This man’s forces intercepted Pierre-Charles Villeneuve after they left Cadiz. This man, who lost an arm while leading an attack on Copenhagen, ordered that the message “England expects that every man will do his duty” be sent aboard his flagship, the HMS Victory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.
Answer: Horatio Nelson

4657. These people discovered a “land of stone slabs” that might be the Torngat Mountains. These people harvested lumber from Markland and recorded finding grapes in another area. These people battled against Skraelings and found grapes during their brief settlements in Vinland and at L’Anse Aux Meadows. The first European peoples to land in Canada were, for ten points, what Scandinavians, including the explorer Leif Ericsson?
Answer: Norsemen (or Vikings

4658. A portrait of a man from this city shows him holding his chin in one hand and a teapot he is working on in another. The subject of that work created an engraving addressed to “Unhappy [this city],” showing 5 bleeding men on King Street, including Crispus Attucks. John Singleton Copley worked in this city when he painted Paul Revere and Samuel Adams. For ten points, name this Massachusetts city where British soldiers killed 5 American colonists in a 1770 “Massacre.”
Answer: Boston

4659. In 1966, three undersea oil tanks were built in this city by the Chicago Bridge and Iron Company, inspiring the name of its Chicago Beach. In 2017, this city’s fire department introduced water jetpacks as a means to quickly reach burning areas. This city contains the Internet City and Media City free zones, as well as the Jebel Ali zone that boasts the largest man-made harbor in the world. Slave labor has driven a construction boom in, for ten points, what most populous city of the United Arab Emirates and home of the Burj Khalifa, the world’s tallest building?
Answer: Dubai Page 1

4660. This man’s policy ran on the ideas of “peace at home, peace in the world,” though his troops almost prompted war with Great Britain in the Chanak crisis. After securing independence, this man was able to replace the Treaty of Sevres with the Treaty of Lausanne. As part of the “Six Arrows” ideology, this leader banned the fez. Years after he won at Gallipoli, this leader established a new capital at Ankara. For ten points, name this founder of modern Turkey.
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

4661. This man was forced to flee on the Vulture after he was implicated by a set of secret plans that were found with John Andre. After Horatio Gates took the credit for this man’s successes at the Battle of Saratoga, this man plotted to surrender West Point to the British. For ten points, name this treasonous American Revolutionary War general.
Answer: Benedict Arnold

4662. In the Cutter incident, vaccines of this virus were accidentally tainted with live virus. The inventor of the vaccine for this disease defended his decision to not patent it with the rebuttal “Could you patent the sun?” Wild cases of this disease in 2015 were reported only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The “iron lung” was primarily used to assist sufferers of, for ten points, what viral disease whose vaccine was developed by Jonas Salk?
Answer: poliomyelitis

4663. This country faced a round of protests when the Cinema Rex fire was mistakenly blamed on government operatives. The Army of Knowledge was established in this country to improve literacy during the White Revolution, which was supported by the repression of the SAVAK police. Shortly after the overthrow of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, this country fell under the grasp of the Ayatollah Khomeini. For ten points, name this country, the site of a 444-day-long hostage crisis in the American embassy in Tehran.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran

4664. A Polish person of uncertain identity who held this profession is dubbed Gallus Anonymous. Aside from being a monk, a resident of Kiev named Nestor was an early practitioner of this profession. The Byzantine Procopius held this profession, producing a “Secret” book that described the misdeeds of Theodora and Justinian. Herodotus is called the father of, for ten points, what profession that involves chronicling the past?
Answer: historian (or chronicler

4665. In 2014, this country lifted its moratorium on the death penalty after over 140 people were killed in an attack on the Army Public School. This country’s national airline was mocked for sacrificing a goat before a flight, in order to fend off bad luck from a December 2016 plane crash that killed 47 people. For 4 months in 2016, this country imposed a ban on Bollywood films. Nawaz Sharif leads, for ten points, what country whose capital is Islamabad?
Answer: Islamic Republic of Pakistan Page 2

4666. This island is home to Samaria Gorge National Park, established as a refuge for a population of feral goats known as kri-kri. This island, which was known as Candia while under Venetian rule, was where the Phaistos disc was excavated. This island was home to a Bronze Age civilization that was the target of Arthur Evans’ excavations and which used the still-undeciphered Linear A script. Heraklion is the largest city on, for ten points, what Greek island whose ancient city of Knossos was the center of the Minoan civilization?
Answer: Crete BONUS: A volcanic eruption on this other Aegean island during the second millennium BC may have caused the collapse of the Minoan civilization and has also been called an inspiration for the Atlantis legend. Santorini (or Thera)

4667. When this man took the throne, he killed two of his father’s advisers and his brother Adonijah. This man’s son promised to be harsher to his subjects than this man was, a mistake that led to the division of this man’s kingdom. Earlier, this father of Rehoboam offered a thousand burnt offerings at the Temple he built, for which God gave him wisdom and fabulous wealth. For ten points, name this king of Israel, the son and successor of David.
Answer: Solomon (

4668. The losing side in this battle lost the commander of its vanguard, Jean le Maingre [MAN-gruh]. The losers were able to successfully raid the baggage train of the victor of this battle, but lost their commander Charles d’Albret and were forced to sign the Treaty of Troyes. A cavalry charge during this battle was bogged down by mud and ran into stakes, leading to massive losses of knights. For ten points, name this decisive victory for English longbowmen during the Hundred Years’ War.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt BONUS: Another decisive victory for England in the Hundred Years War was this 1346 victory for Edward III, which allowed him to capture Calais and proved the importance of the longbow. Battle of Crecy

4669. Shortly before this man’s death, he sent an unsuccessful punitive expedition against the Singhasari kingdom of Java. This man was victorious in the Toluid war against his brother, Ariq Boke, though his attempts to conquer Japan were thwarted by the “divine wind,” kamikaze. The Italian explorer Marco Polo visited this ruler’s capital of Dadu, located in modern day Beijing. For ten points, name this founder of the Yuan Dynasty in China and grandson of Genghis Khan.
Answer: Kublai Khan Page 3

4670. A tunnel built in this city connected Dobrinja [doh-brin-ya] and Butmir, allowing civilian escape and the inflow of humanitarian aid. Stanislav Galic [gall-itch] was convicted of crimes against humanity for his actions in this city. The attacking forces of the Republika Srpska replaced those of the Yugoslav People’s Army in this city, where fighting was ended by the Dayton Accords. For ten points, name this capital city that was brutally besieged during the Bosnian War.
Answer: Siege of Sarajevo BONUS: This type of soldier was deployed in Sarajevo, but failed to stop the violence. These forces, drawn from many different nations, wear distinctive blue helmets. United Nations peacekeepers (or the United Nations Protection Force or UNPROFOR)

4671. This city was attacked after Imre Thokoly asked Kara Mustafa for assistance. Matthias Corvinus captured this city during his conflict with Frederick III. This city was attacked at the end of a campaign for Hungary that began after the Battle of Mohacs [moh-hotch]. The intervention of Polish Winged Hussars under Jan Sobieski saved this city in 1683. For ten points, name this city that was besieged twice by the Ottoman Empire as it tried to defeat Austria.
Answer: Vienna BONUS: Vienna became known for these institutions after the

4672. Early knowledge about this event was derived from the journals of Patrick Gass. This event’s only casualty was Charles Floyd, who died of appendicitis in present-day Sioux City. A slave named York and the translator Toussaint Charbonneau aided this journey, which Thomas Jefferson ordered to explore the newly bought Louisiana Territory. Sacagawea aided, for ten points, what American expedition into the Western United States?
Answer: Lewis and Clark Expedition (or the Corps of Discovery expedition) BONUS: The Lewis and Clark Expedition

4673. Ancient Greek city where democracy was funded by the silver mines at Laurium.
Answer: Athens

4674. Island where the Romans mined silver behind the protection of Hadrian’s Wall.
Answer: Great Britain or Britannia (do not

4675. Island nation that exported silver from its Iwami Ginzan mines to the Dutch.
Answer: Japan

4676. South American country named for silver. A river that borders it to the north, the Rio de la Plata, is also named for silver.
Answer: Argentina

4677. Kingdom that provided the Habsburgs with silver from the town of Kutna Hora. It came under a personal union with Austria in 1526.
Answer: Bohemia

4678. Region split between Austria and Italy that was home to Habsburg silver mines at St. Johann.
Answer: Tyrol

4679. Silver and gold alloy used to make the first coins in Lydia.
Answer: electrum

4680. Mountain of silver exploited by the Spanish after their conquest of modern Bolivia.
Answer: Cerro Potosi French Revolution Name the...

4681. French King executed during the Revolution.
Answer: Louis XVI [16]

4682. Parisian prison that was stormed at the beginning of the French Revolution.
Answer: the Bastille Saint-Antoine

4683. Popular, sharp method of execution, which became a symbol of the excessive violence during the Reign of Terror.
Answer: guillotine (

4684. Revolutionary who started the Reign of Terror, which ended with his execution.
Answer: Maximilien Robespierre

4685. Traditional subdivision of French society that was less powerful than the clergy and nobility.
Answer: Third E

4686. Radical journalist and revolutionary who was assassinated by Charlotte Corday in his bath.
Answer: Jean-Paul Marat

4687. Location of a 1789 oath to create a constitution, a pivotal event early in the Revolution.
Answer: a tennis court (

4688. Coup against radical Jacobins that put an end to the Reign of Terror.
Answer: Thermidorian Reaction Page 5

4689. Ancient civilization whose New Kingdom rulers included Ramesses the Great.
Answer: ancient Egypt

4690. Status that Ramesses aspired to achieve. Other beings with this status included Ra and Horus.
Answer: godhood (

4691. Military vehicles that Ramesses used, consisting of a carriage pulled by horses.
Answer: chariots

4692. 1274 BC battle that Ramesses fought against the Hittites, the largest battle of those vehicles in history.
Answer: Battle of Kadesh

4693. Diplomatic agreement made between Ramesses and Hattusili III, the first recorded example in history.
Answer: peace treaty (

4694. Site of Ramesses’s tomb, located near Thebes. The tomb of Tutankhamun was also located here.
Answer: Valley of the Kings

4695. Wife of Ramesses, for whom he constructed a temple at Abu Simbel.
Answer: Nefertari

4696. Region to the south, home to the kingdoms of Kush and Meroe, that Ramesses attacked.
Answer: Nubia Fourth Quarter

4697. The busiest cantilever bridge in the world connects this city to Howrah. Located on the Hooghly River, a Home for the Dying was established here by the Missionaries of Charity, led by an (+) Albanian-born nun. This city’s Fort William was the site of a 1756 incident where British prisoners were suffocated in a small room. A (*) “Black Hole” tragedy took place in, for ten points, what Indian city in the Ganges Delta, the capital of West Bengal and adopted home of Mother Teresa?
Answer: Kolkata (or Calcutta)

4698. It’s not Austria, but the two Vienna Awards returned territory that this country had lost in the Treaty of Trianon. Ferenc Szalasi [fer-entz sh-lah-zee] replaced (+) Admiral Miklos Horthy as leader of this country, allowing the Arrow Cross Party to take power. Janos Kadar [yan-osh kah-dar] took power in this country after it tried to leave the (*) Warsaw Pact. For ten points, name this country where Imre Nagy’s [nahj’s] 1956 revolution was crushed by Soviet tanks in Budapest.
Answer: Hungary

4699. The GIA, a group of Algerian terrorists, bombed this system in 1995, wounding 13 people at Maison Blanche. This system, which was inspired by Fulgence Bienvenue, opened during the (+) 1900 Universal Exposition. It features many Hector Guimard-designed entrances designed in the Art Nouveau style, and in 1930, it purchased a competitor run by the North-South Company, thus incorporating (*) Line 13 from Saint-Lazare. For ten points, name this public transit system of the French capital.
Answer: Paris Metro (

4700. These people established the state of Natalia after recovering a lost treaty from the body of their leader, Piet Retief, who had been executed by (+) Dingaan. Andries Pretorius led these people to victory at the Blood River by utilizing a laager fort against (*) Zulus seeking to disrupt the Great Trek. These people founded the Orange Free State after leaving the British-held Cape Colony. For ten points, name these Dutch-speaking people of South Africa.
Answer: Boers (

4701. For ten points, name this South American independence leader, nicknamed “The Liberator.”
Answer: Simon Bolivar

4702. A French attempt to build this structure failed when Ferdinand de Lesseps was found to be misappropriating funds. The Darien Scheme tried to build this (+) structure, whose construction began in earnest after the Hay-Bunau-Varilla treaty. This structure was returned to the government of Omar Torrijos by (*) Jimmy Carter in 1977. For ten points, name this Central American waterway that links the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal

4703. Catherine Cheynel foiled a surprise attack on this city by Charles Emmanuel I of Savoy by pouring soup on the attackers, which is commemorated in l’Escalade. Jean-Henri Dunant founded an organization in this city after the Battle of (+) Solferino, and a treaty signed in this city defines the term “refugee.” The Hague Conventions updated a series of treaties signed in this city, home to the International (*) Red Cross. For ten points, name this Swiss city, which names conventions concerning treatment of prisoners of war and non-combatants.
Answer: Geneva

4704. This city suffered the “Night of the Black Snow” in 1945. The 20th Air Force frequently attacked this city in Operation Matterhorn. Operation (+) Meetinghouse, which targeted this city for firebombing, was the deadliest single air raid during World War II. A park in (*) Yokoamicho Park commemorates victims of air raids in this city, where the International Military Tribunal for the Far East was held. For ten points, name this Japanese city and capital during World War II.
Answer: Tokyo

4705. This man conducted the 1955-1958 trans-Antarctic expedition, making him the first person since Robert Scott to reach the (+) South Pole. John Hunt led this man for much of his most famous expedition, in which his team traversed the Khumbu Icefall. This man was knighted for that expedition, unlike (*) Tenzing Norgay, his Sherpa guide. For ten points, name this first person to climb to the summit of Mount Everest.
Answer: Sir Edmund Hillary BONUS: What March

4706. This man shared power with Alexander Kosygin in the early years of his leadership, and his poor economic planning led to the beginning of the Era of Stagnation. This leader joined Jimmy Carter in signing the SALT II accords. He justified military intervention to protect communism in a namesake doctrine. For ten points, name this Soviet General Secretary who succeeded Khrushchev.
Answer: Leonid Brezhnev

4707. A campaign against these people began when Galerius was told that their existence prevented the Oracle at Delphi from speaking. The catacombs of Rome were predominantly used for the burial of these people. Though these people suffered the Diocletian Persecution and Nero blamed them for causing the Great Fire, they were eventually granted legal status in the 313 AD Edict of Milan. For ten points, name these followers of a monotheistic faith adopted by Constantine the Great.
Answer: Christians (or Christianity)

4708. A theme in Mozart’s twenty-fifth piano concerto is sometimes cited as this song’s source. Pyotr Lavrov wrote a “worker’s” version of this song, which was originally written by Claude Rouget de Lisle as “War Song for the Rhine Army.” A musical depiction of the Battle of Borodino juxtaposes this song with “God Save The Tsar.” This song was quoted in Tchaikovsky’s 1812 Overture, where it represents Napoleon’s army. For ten points, name this revolutionary song, the national anthem of France.
Answer: La Marseillaise [mar-say-ehz] (

4709. This system was an improvement upon one developed for Napoleon’s army by Charles Barbier; that system was night writing. The Grade 2 variety is the most commonly used English type of this system, which was developed by a man who suffered an accident with an awl as a child. For ten points, name this writing system of raised dots used by the blind.
Answer: braille writing

4710. This organization built a fortress at Rabaul and was the target of the Great Turkey Shoot. This military force defeated Force Z, consisting of the Prince of Wales and the Repulse, which had been sent to reinforce Malaya. Its forces were concentrated in the Combined Fleet, which suffered the loss of four aircraft carriers at the Battle of Midway. For ten points, name this military force that fought America in the Pacific Ocean during World War II.
Answer: Imperial Japanese Navy (

4711. An attempt at this process, the Erfurt Union, failed due to the Agreement of Olmutz, which revived an older attempt at this process. A step in this process was the formation of the Zollverein customs union. During the revolutions of 1848, a parliament at Frankfurt sought to perform this action, offering the crown to the King of Prussia. For ten points, name this process of forming a new country governed from Berlin.
Answer: German unification (

4712. A film about one of these locations could not be made when James Stockdale tried to commit suicide to stop production. The Blueboy assault team purposefully crashed a helicopter to put Green Berets in range of one of these locations during Operation Ivory Coast. After his A-4E Skyhawk was shot down, John McCain was transported to the most famous of these locations known as Hoa Lo, or the Hanoi Hilton. For ten points, name these entities used by the North Vietnamese to hold captured American troops.
Answer: Vietnamese prisoner of war camps (or POW camps

4713. This country’s Catatumbo River has more frequent lightning strikes than anywhere else on Earth. A brackish inlet in this country was home to a 1914 oil discovery and an 1823 naval battle that earned this country’s independence from Spain. This country is home to the tallest waterfall in the world, Angel Falls, and the mouth of the Orinoco River. Lake Maracaibo is found in, for ten points, what South American country where a “Bolivarian Revolution” was led by Hugo Chavez?
Answer: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

4714. This man sacked the castle of Jacob’s Ford after a bribe of 100,000 gold pieces to stop the castle’s construction was turned down. Though this man was defeated at the Battle of Montgisard, he later formed a truce with Baldwin IV. One campaign against this man was called after his victory at Hattin, though he ended that conflict by granting Christians safe pilgrimage to Jerusalem. For ten points, name this Kurdish founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, an enemy of Richard I in the Third Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (or An-Nasir Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub)

4715. This man claimed that there were 400 neatly marked graves because one soldier slept. As part of Operation Fortitude, this man was assigned command of the fictitious First U.S Army Group. This general led the breakout from Normandy and the relief of the garrison of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge, but was relieved of command after two slapping incidents in North Africa and Sicily. For ten points, name this aggressive commander of the American Third Army during World War II.
Answer: George S. Patton Jr. Second Quarter

4716. An early action during this conflict was the capture of Government House in Stanley. This conflict began on the orders of Leopoldo Galtieri, who lost power as a result. During this war, Exocet missiles were able to destroy the Sheffield, and the Conqueror was able to sink the General Belgrano. This war’s outcome hastened the fall of a military junta while strengthening Margaret Thatcher’s government. For ten points, name this 1982 war between Argentina and Britain over a South Atlantic archipelago.
Answer: Falklands War BONUS: The Falklands War featured one of the few post World War II sinkings by a nuclear-powered ship of this type. Submarine Page 2

4717. A tribe of these people called the Senones marched on Rome, demanding that Quintus Fabius be handed over; when he wasn’t, these people won the Battle of the Allia, then cheated the losers with weighted scales for measuring tribute. A chieftain of the Arverni tribe of these people led a massive rebellion of these people until his defeat at the Siege of Alesia. For ten points, name these people, the barbarian inhabitants of modern-day France during Roman times.
Answer: Gauls (

4718. Sculptures of caryatids were used in place of these structures in the Erechtheion on the Athenian acropolis. A temple at Karnak includes enormous examples of these structures decorated with hieroglyphs in its hypostyle courtyard. Their capitals can be decorated with various objects, including acanthus leaves on the top of the Corinthian type. For ten points, name these architectural elements that often bear the weight of a roof.
Answer: columns (

4719. This man’s reputation suffered when two dozen miners were killed in a firefight at his Ludlow colony. Charles Pratt and Henry Rogers decided to work with this man after their companies were priced out in the “Cleveland Massacre.” When this man’s monopoly was found to be in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act, it was split into companies that became Exxon and Mobil. For ten points, name this wealthiest American of all time, the founder of the Standard Oil Company.
Answer: John D. Rockefeller BONUS: Which other wealthy titan of American industry was a dominant figure in the steel industry and is the namesake of both a university in Pittsburgh and a concert venue in New York? Andrew Carnegie

4720. This politician supported Lord Derby’s attempts to pass a Reform Act prohibiting rotten boroughs. This leader’s foreign policies included buying out the Suez Canal Company and ordering a failed invasion of Afghanistan as part of the Great Game with Russia. This politician was a favorite of Queen Victoria and had her crowned as Empress of India. For ten points, name this Conservative prime minister of Great Britain and rival of William Gladstone.
Answer: Benjamin Disraeli BONUS: Disraeli began his political career as a supporter of this prominent Conservative, but eventually opposed him over his repeal of the Corn Laws. This man, who employed William Gladstone in his cabinet, created the first English police force. Sir Robert Peel Page 3

4721. A man undergoing this event was told, “Play the man, Master Ridley.” Many people who were suspected of holding “Thyestean banquets” endured this action, to which Pierre de Lancre subjected many Basques. Carbon monoxide poisoning was a common fate for subjects of this action. A military commander who successfully lifted the Siege of Orleans died via, for ten points, what method of execution for Joan of Arc?
Answer: burning at the stake (

4722. This region was united with the Palatinate by Charles Theodore and acquired new territory after the Treaty of Pressburg with Napoleon. A duchy in this region was ruled by the Wittelsbachs and led the Counter-Reformation as a bastion of Catholicism. Its “Mad King,” Ludwig II, built Neuschwanstein [noysh-vahn-stine] castle in this region and allied with Austria against Prussia. For ten points, name this southern state of Germany, governed from Munich.
Answer: Bavaria BONUS: In

4723. An invasion of this country began shortly after Robert Paz was shot on his way to dinner in the El Chorrillo [chore-EE-oh] neighborhood. Loud rock music was used to flush a leader of this country out of the Vatican embassy, where he had taken refuge. In an attempt to stop drug trafficking in this country, George H.W. Bush authorized military intervention in Operation Just Cause in 1989. For ten points, name this Central American country from which Manuel Noriega was removed from power.
Answer: Panama BONUS: The U.S. Army tried to flush out Manuel Noriega by playing music from this American hard rock group whose hits include “Welcome to the Jungle” and “Paradise City”. Guns and Roses Third Quarter The categories are ...

4724. Public service he began in Philadelphia, which used bucket brigades to put down conflagrations.
Answer: fire department (

4725. Children’s toy he wanted to fly in a thunderstorm as a science experiment.
Answer: kite with a key, attached to the end of the string, in a jar

4726. Annual publication by Franklin that included weather forecasts and his essay “The Way to Wealth.”
Answer: Poor Richard’s Almanack

4727. Modern Ivy League school that Franklin founded as The Academy and College of Philadelphia.
Answer: University of Pennsylvania

4728. Food that caused Franklin to give up vegetarianism; the UK and Iceland “fought” a war over these creatures in 1976.
Answer: cod (

4729. Current US state, named for an English island, whose last Royal Governor was William Franklin, Ben’s son.
Answer: New Jersey

4730. Meeting where Franklin served on the Committee of Five, which drafted the Declaration of Independence.
Answer: Second Continental Congress (

4731. Country to which he served as an emissary during the American Revolution
Answer: France Justinian the Great Name the...

4732. Empire that Justinian ruled, which grew out of the Eastern Roman Empire.
Answer: Byzantine Empire

4733. Religious official appointed by Justinian, the head of the Roman Catholic Church.
Answer: pope (or Bishop of Rome)

4734. Church built in Constantinople by Justinian. It was converted to a mosque after the Ottoman conquest.
Answer: Hagia Sophia

4735. African city reconquered by Justinian from the Vandals, once the capital of Rome’s rival for the Mediterranean.
Answer: Carthage

4736. Riots that nearly toppled Justinian after a series of chariot races got out of hand.
Answer: Nika Riots

4737. Region ruled by Justinian’s rival, the Sassanid Empire, including cities such as Esfahan.
Answer: Persia (

4738. Influential wife of Justinian, who rose from being an actress to Empress.
Answer: Theodora

4739. General employed by Justinian to conquer Italy, before his eventual disgrace and begging on the streets of Rome.
Answer: Belisarius Page 5

4740. Country that currently controls the territory of Hong Kong.
Answer: People’s Republic of China

4741. Country that leased Hong Kong from the Qing [ching] Dynasty.
Answer: United Kingdom (or UK

4742. Conflicts that forced the Qing to give up Hong Kong, fought over an addictive drug.
Answer: Opium Wars

4743. Item that provided protection from tear gas as well as rain during a namesake 2014 movement in Hong Kong.
Answer: Umbrella Revolution (

4744. Nearby former Portuguese colony that, like Hong Kong, is a Special Administrative Region.
Answer: Macau

4745. Animal nickname for Hong Kong, as well as Taiwan, Singapore, and South Korea, for their rapid economic booms.
Answer: (Four) Asian Tigers

4746. Densely populated settlement in Kowloon that was a home of lawlessness until its 1993 demolition.
Answer: Kowloon Walled City

4747. City that borders Hong Kong on the mainland. It was the first Special Economic Zone.
Answer: Shenzhen Fourth Quarter

4748. One work by this man claims that religion is necessary to support political prosperity and notes that “the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake” against the “insidious wiles of foreign influence.” This man drew an analogy between the interdependence of the (+) north to south and east to west, arguing that decisions must be made as one nation. This man cautioned against the influence of European foreign powers and of the dangers of (*) political parties. For ten points, name this man, who gave counsel to a new nation in his farewell address.
Answer: George Washington

4749. Two answers required. The fleets of these two nations joined up to defeat Andrea Doria at Ponza. Fears of Habsburg expansion after Charles V’s capture of Tunis led (+) Jean de la Forest to negotiate a military treaty between these two nations. These two nations faced each other in the Battle of the Pyramids during the Egyptian campaign, which marked the end of the 1536 (*) “Unholy Alliance” signed by Francis I and Suleiman the Magnificent. For ten points, name these two European empires, led by Napoleon and Sultan Selim III.
Answer: France and the Ottoman Empire Page 6

4750. This body’s legislation was stored in the treasury building, called the Aerarium. A common stalling tactic in this body was to continue speaking until nightfall. This body was forbidden from (+) meeting more than a mile from the pomerium. The Catiline Conspiracy was exposed in a meeting of this body, whose actions could be vetoed by (*) tribunes. Its members were appointed by the censors, often after holding offices like aedile and quaestor. For ten points, name this legislative body of Rome.
Answer: Roman Senate (

4751. In 1944, the SS Richard Montgomery struck a sandbar and sunk in the mouth of this river while holding hundreds of tons of explosives. This river’s estuary is home to the Shivering Sands and Red Sands forts, which were designed by Guy Maunsell to provide (+) anti-air protection. Several plans have been proposed to build a man-made island in this river’s estuary, possibly near Cliffe in (*) Kent, for use by a new airport to alleviate congestion at Gatwick and Heathrow. For ten points, name this river that, during World War II, provided ground-based navigation for the Luftwaffe as they tried to bomb London.
Answer: River Thames

4752. For his efforts during an attempt at this action, Michel Ney was dubbed the “bravest of the brave.” The truce of Deulino ended a successful instance of this action, which included the Battle of (+) Klushino. A leader fled to the Ottoman Empire after the Great Frost of 1709 doomed an attempt at this action, which ended with a defeat for Adam Leuwenhaupt. A failed attempt at this action was doomed by scorched earth tactics, (*) Cossacks, and “General Winter.” For ten points, name this difficult military action that Napoleon attempted in 1812.
Answer: invading Russia (

4753. Jehan Boinebroke was a merchant who dealt mainly in this good, which Pliny the Elder thought best came from Tarentum. Edward I had increased the duties on this good by a factor of 6 in order to help finance his French campaign. The seat of the (+) speaker of the House of Lords is made of this good to represent its importance to the English economy. A village in Norfolk provides the name for the (*) worsted type of this good, which could be felted if the fibers were soaked. For ten points, name this textile fiber obtained from sheep.
Answer: wool

4754. The Suntec City complex in this city includes the Fountain of Wealth, which was once the world’s largest fountain. Moshe Safdie was inspired by decks of cards for his design of a three- tower resort in this city called the (+) Marina Bay Sands. The Armenian Sarkies Brothers founded a luxury hotel in this city in 1887 and named it for this city’s founder, (*) Sir Stamford Raffles. For ten points, name this Southeast Asian city-state whose economy has flourished in the five decades since it was expelled from Malaysia.
Answer: Republic of Singapore Page 7

4755. This colony was founded after the conquest of the Moro people and conflicts with Brunei and Sulu. Ships departing from this colony brought porcelain and china to (+) Acapulco across the Pacific. The discoverer of this colony, (*) Ferdinand Magellan, died here during the Battle of Mactan. For ten points, name this Spanish colony where galleons brought silver to the port of Manila.
Answer: Philippines (or the Spanish East Indies)

4756. This man liberated Bulgaria from 400 years of Ottoman rule following a successful siege of Pleven. He employed Dmitri Milyutin to open army recruitment to all social classes, and he encouraged the new zemstvo system of local government. Loris-Melikov’s work with this leader to establish a parliament was thwarted when this leader was assassinated by the People’s Will in St. Petersburg. For ten points, name this Russian tsar who emancipated the serfs.
Answer: Alexander II

4757. A film subtitled “A Prayer for Rain” chronicles a disaster in this country in which people suffered pulmonary edema after exposure to methyl isocyanate [iso-cyan-ate]. This country’s court system charged CEO Warren Anderson for his role in that tragedy, which struck at a pesticide plant in 1984. For ten points, name this country where a gas leak at a Union Carbide facility in Bhopal killed thousands of people in Madhya Pradesh.
Answer: India (

4758. This scientist is often credited with inventing the anchor escapement used in pendulum clocks. Isaac Newton’s quote “If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulder of giants” was probably a jab at this scientist’s short height. He wrote about his use of microscopes in his book Micrographia, and his namesake law can be stated as restoring force is proportional to displacement. For ten points, name this British scientist who coined the term “cell.”
Answer: Robert Hooke

4759. Description acceptable. Edward House drafted a plan calling for this action, which relied upon the work of the Phillimore Committee. William Borah and Henry Cabot Lodge opposed this action, citing their disapproval of Article Ten of a certain proposed covenant. For ten points, name this action, never taken despite the efforts of President Woodrow Wilson, which doomed a certain international body to irrelevance.
Answer: the United

4760. A revolution against this leader began after a boy was arrested for political graffiti in Daraa. To stop the Southern Front and Army of Conquest, this Ba’athist leader allegedly ordered his air force to use barrel bombs in an ongoing civil war. This leader brokered a ceasefire with Vladimir Putin shortly after recapturing Aleppo in December 2016. For ten points, name the current president of Syria.
Answer: Bashar al-Assad

4761. One man accomplished this feat after the widow of Zarephath accused him of bringing her sins to remembrance. Before accomplishing this feat, another man uttered “Talitha kum;” he was delayed from performing this action by a continuously bleeding woman. On a different occasion, after waiting two extra days to perform this action, the same man’s emotional response is recorded in the shortest verse in the Bible. The phrase “Jesus wept” occurs immediately before an instance of, for ten points, what miracle that Jesus performed for Lazarus?
Answer: raising the dead (

4762. As a child, this man was targeted in the Kaiserswerth plot that left Anno II as regent. This man prompted a conflict by installing Guibert of Ravenna as Antipope Clement III. This man walked to Canossa Castle barefoot to beg forgiveness from Gregory VII after a dispute involving the pope’s authority to appoint bishops in the Lay Investiture controversy. For ten points, name this Holy Roman Emperor who shares his name and number with a French king who claimed Paris was worth a mass.
Answer: Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor (or Heinrich IV)

4763. Henry Raymond defended this business with a homemade Gatling gun during a draft riot. Along with the Washington Post, this company was targeted by the Nixon administration for publishing the Pentagon Papers, and it had earlier won a lawsuit brought against it by L.B. Sullivan. For ten points, name this “Gray Lady,” a newspaper whose motto is “All the News That’s Fit to Print” and is published in Manhattan.
Answer: The New York Times (or NYT

4764. The Negroli family, based in Milan, was a key producer of these objects. Decorated versions of these objects were worn at tilts, and Japanese objects of this type were made from overlapping leather scales. These objects included the hauberk and gauntlets, and Roman legionaries wore types of these made from mail or plates. For ten points, name these protective outfits that were used in jousting and medieval warfare.
Answer: suits of armor (

4765. Fernando de la Rua, urging him not to arrest peaceful protestors during riots in December 2001. In November 2015, this man released the multilingual rock album Wake Up! In December 2015, this man and Patriarch Kirill issued the Havana declaration, calling for the end of religious persecution in the Middle East. This man canonized two of his predecessors, John XXIII [23] and John Paul II, and his immediate predecessor, Benedict XVI [16], resigned. For ten points, name this current head of the Roman Catholic Church.
Answer: Pope Francis (or Jorge Bergoglio) Second Quarter

4766. This man gained the territories of Brittany and Normandy after the Treaty of Le Goulet with Philip II Augustus, but lost them after his defeat at the Battle of Bouvines. After this man tried to appoint an Archbishop of Canterbury, Innocent III excommunicated him. For ten points, name this brother of Richard the Lionheart who, after being confronted by English nobles at Runnymede, signed the Magna Carta.
Answer: King John (

4767. Two lions attack these animals in reliefs at the entrance to the Apadana of Darius and Xerxes. Four of the extinct ancestor of these animals, called aurochs, were painted using twisted perspective in a “Hall” of these animals. Several youths are shown ceremonially leaping over the horns of these animals on the walls of the Palace at Knossos on Crete. For ten points, name this bovine animal that provided the head for the mythical Minotaur.
Answer: bulls (

4768. This man decided not to contest an election after Estes Kefauver won the New Hampshire primary. This man used Turnip Day as an opportunity to attack the Republican majorities in the 80th Congress. This man, who ordered the integration of the armed forces, suffered in popularity later for his nationalization of the steel mills during the Korean War. For ten points, name this president who was not defeated by Dewey during the 1948 Presidential election.
Answer: Harry S Truman BONUS: In

4769. The oldest surviving example of this instrument is named after King Charles IX of France, who commissioned it in 1560. A difficult sonata for this instrument by Giuseppe Tartini is nicknamed “Devil’s Trill.” J.S. Bach wrote a set of sonatas and partitas as solos for this instrument, which was made in Cremona by families like Guarneri and Amati. For ten points, name this highest-pitched string instrument to be manufactured by Antonio Stradivari.
Answer: violin BONUS: This violin virtuoso, who legendarily sold his soul to the devil, composed a

4770. Gustave Courbet fled to Switzerland after advocating the destruction of the Vendome Column during this government’s tenure. Supporters of this government were shot at the Federalists’ Wall in Pere Lachaise [pair la-shez] during the Bloody Week, in which Marshal MacMahon restored control for Adolphe Thiers [tee-air]. For ten points, name this revolutionary socialist government, formed after the Franco-Prussian War in the French capital.
Answer: Paris Commune BONUS: Adolphe Theirs was the first president of this French government, which lasted until France’s defeat in the early stages of World War II. French Third Republic (

4771. This writer’s opposition to the collection of indemnities by William Ament after the Boxer Rebellion prompted him to write an essay “To the Person Sitting in Darkness.” This author of Roughing It also wrote about his early years as an apprentice to a steamboat captain in Life on the Mississippi, in which he explained the genesis of his pen name. For ten points, name this author, born Samuel Langhorne Clemens, famous for his Adventures of Tom Sawyer.
Answer: Mark Twain (

4772. One holder of this position expanded his capital city to include Janiculum Hill, while another holder of this position created the Tribal Assembly for the lower classes. Holders of this position repeatedly fought against Veii [way-ee] and destroyed the city of Alba Longa. The last holder of this position was overthrown by Lucius Junius Brutus after the Rape of Lucretia. Julius Caesar was assassinated because the conspirators thought he wanted to revive, for ten points, what position held by the first seven rulers of Rome?
Answer: King of Rome (

4773. This man invaded Honduras to defeat his rebellious lieutenant Cristobal the Old. This man was attacked by his rivals Diego Velazquez and Bishop Fonseca in the Council of the Indies. This man burned his ships after landing at modern Veracruz and allied with the people of Tlaxcala. He captured Montezuma II in his capital of Tenochtitlan and created the Viceroyalty of New Spain. For ten points, name this conquistador who conquered the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Hernan Cortes BONUS: Cortes implemented this system of forced labor in New Spain, where a number of natives were granted to conquistadors, who in return were supposed to protect them and convert them. encomienda Third Quarter The categories are ...

4774. River, along with the Euphrates, provided Mesopotamia with the sustenance required to produce artwork?
Answer: Tigris River

4775. Terrorist organization based in Raqqa has destroyed many ancient artworks?
Answer: ISIS (or Islamic

4776. Stepped pyramids were common in Mesopotamian cites?
Answer: ziggurats

4777. Wedge-shaped script, written using a stylus, was used to write on some Mesopotamian artworks?
Answer: cuneiform

4778. Legendary, part-god figure built the walls of Uruk, protecting the art in the White Temple?
Answer: Gilgamesh

4779. Civilization made sculptures of Lamassus, a creature with the head of a man and the body of a winged ox
Answer: Assyrian

4780. Blue gate showing dragons and bulls now resides in a Berlin museum?
Answer: Ishtar Gate

4781. Blue stone was frequently imported from central Asia for artistic use?
Answer: lapis lazuli Protestantism in France Name the...

4782. “Reformed” group of Calvinists that fought with the French crown during the Wars of Religion and were protected by the Edict of Nantes [nahnt].
Answer: Huguenots

4783. Capital city that the Protestant Henry IV declared was “well worth a mass” on converting to Catholicism.
Answer: Paris

4784. “Sun King” who revoked the Edict of Nantes in 1685.
Answer: Louis XIV [14] (

4785. 1572 massacre of French Protestants ordered by the Queen Mother.
Answer: St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre

4786. Dynasty that supported the Protestants through its cadet House of Conde. It was the last royal house of France.
Answer: House of Bourbon

4787. Cardinal who fought French Protestants while serving Louis XIII.
Answer: Richelieu (or Armand-Jean du Plessis)

4788. 1685 edict that revoked the Edict of Nantes.
Answer: Edict of Fontainebleau

4789. Port city that was a haven for French Protestants until its destruction by Louis XIII. It was reinforced by the English Duke of Buckingham.
Answer: La Rochelle Page 5

4790. Genocide carried out by Nazi Germany against “undesirable” people.
Answer: Holocaust (or Shoah

4791. Polish concentration camp, which included an extermination camp at Birkenau, used during that genocide.
Answer: Auschwitz-Birkenau

4792. Dutch city where the International Criminal Court prosecutes perpetrators of genocide.
Answer: The Hague

4793. Ethnic group targeted by an Ottoman genocide during World War I, now denied by the Turkish government.
Answer: Armenian people

4794. Modern country that was the site of the Holodomor famine and is the site of Russian military intervention.
Answer: Ukraine

4795. Western region of Sudan, subject to fighting between the government and Janjaweed militias.
Answer: Darfur genocide

4796. Sudanese President indicted by the ICC for that genocide.
Answer: Omar al-Bashir

4797. Modern-day country where colonial Germans committed a genocide of the Herero and Namaqua people.
Answer: Namibia Fourth Quarter

4798. This man’s expedition to aid China after a flood is documented by the book North to the Orient. This man, who proposed a neutrality pact with Germany and supported the (+) America First movement, had his son kidnapped by Bruno Hauptmann in the “Crime of the Century.” In 1927, this man won the Orteig Prize for his (*) journey from Roosevelt Field to Le Bourget Field. For ten points, name this American aviator who undertook the first non-stop solo trans-Atlantic flight.
Answer: Charles Lindbergh

4799. This school of philosophy divided the world into four categories, including “substance” and “quality.” The concept of adiaphora, or actions outside the realm of morality, was (+) first propounded by this school of thought. One proponent of this school of thought frequently encouraged himself to “Erase impressions!” and wrote his (*) Meditations while on a military campaign. Zeno of Citium founded, for ten points, what school of Ancient Greek thought, followed by Marcus Aurelius, that stressed virtue and freedom from emotion?
Answer: Stoicism

4800. A legend about this battle notes that the losing king was saved by an angel who turned him to marble. The Hungarian Orban designed the Basilica and Dardanelles guns for use in this siege in an attempt to breach the (+) Theodosian Walls. The winning side in this battle used a series of greased logs to transport ships across the Golden Horn. (*) Mehmed II was victorious in, for ten points, what 1453 siege in which the Ottomans captured the capital of the Byzantine Empire, renaming it Istanbul?
Answer: 1453 Siege (or Battle, etc.) of Constantinople Page 6

4801. This country was harshly criticized by the EU after the appointees to its Constitutional Tribunal were abruptly changed by the newly-elected Law and (+) Justice Party in 2015. During October 2016, thousands of women in this country participated in the “Black Monday” protests against a proposed total (*) ban on abortion. For ten points, name this predominantly Catholic country of slightly under 40 million people led by Andrzej [andr-zhay] Duda from Warsaw.
Answer: Poland (or Polska)

4802. This event proved difficult to stop once the Cornhill Tower was cut off. Attempts to mitigate this event were described by John Evelyn. Lord Mayor Thomas Bloodworth was lambasted for his slow response to this event, which began at the bakery of Thomas Farriner on (+) Pudding Lane, as described by the diary of Samuel Pepys [peeps]. St. Paul’s Cathedral was destroyed in this event, so (*) Christopher Wren was commissioned to redesign it and much of the city. For ten points, name this 1666 event that devastated England’s capital.
Answer: Great Fire of London

4803. One leader of this country packed the head of a rival in ice so that he could communicate with it. Black dogs in this country were hunted down after the disgraced Clement Barbot was thought to have transfigured; Barbot was later caught in person by the (+) Tonton Macoute police. In 2011, when former president Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to this poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, he was arrested on corruption charges upon his arrival in (*) Port-au- Prince. For ten points, name this nation that shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican Republic.
Answer: Haiti

4804. One of these specific vehicles was the focal point of the Revolt of the Lashes; that vehicle triggered a competition between the ABC nations in South America and was named after Minas Gerais. A plan to obtain more of these objects was proposed by (+) Alfred von Tirpitz in Germany. Jacky Fisher proposed the creation of the first of these vehicles, which were limited in size by the Treaty of (*) Washington and which fought in the Battle of Jutland. For ten points, name this class of large, “all big-gun” ships that dominated the early 20th century, named for a British Royal Navy battleship.
Answer: dreadnoughts (

4805. The Academic Legion toppled a government in this empire when Franz von Pillersdorf failed to repeal censorship laws. This empire lost possession of Lombardy in the Treaty of Villafranca during the Italian Wars of Independence. Following (+) Francis I’s defeat at Austerlitz and the ensuing Treaty of Pressburg, the Holy Roman Empire was effectively reorganized as this empire. In 1867, this empire entered into the (*) Ausgleich dual-monarchy under Franz Joseph I. For ten points, name this empire that merged with Hungary in the 19th century.
Answer: Austrian Empire (do not

4806. This figure commissioned Richard Mique to build a hamlet retreat at Yvelines. At a meeting in Saint-Cloud, this figure attempted to pay Honore Mirabeau to save her reputation. This figure lost popularity after allegedly defrauding jewelers in the (+) Affairof the Diamond Necklace. She was further vilified for her (*) Austrian descent and her lavish hairstyles, though this daughter of Maria Theresa probably never said “Let them eat cake.” For ten points, name this wife of Louis XVI.
Answer: Marie Antoinette Josephe-Jeanne d’Autriche-Lorraine BONUS: In what modern North African nation did Stephen Decatur

4807. Apollodorus of Damascus was a military engineer for this man and designed a structure named for him that includes the Basilica Ulpia. A statue of this man was replaced by one of Saint Peter, standing on top of a monument to this man decorated with reliefs culminating in the suicide of Decebalus. This man built a bridge over the Danube River in his most famous campaign. For ten points, name this second of the Five Good Emperors who commemorated his conquest of Dacia with a namesake column.
Answer: Trajan (or Caesar Nerva Trajanus Germanicus or Marcus Ulpius Nerva Trajanus Augustus; do not

4808. Shortly after reports of this scandal emerged, the Bybee Memo was leaked, which was followed shortly by the resignation of Jack Goldsmith. Antonio Taguba’s report on this scandal concluded that Brigadier General Janis Karpinski allowed it to continue. One picture that emerged from this scandal depicts Charles Graner and Lynnie England giving a thumbs up behind a naked human pyramid. For ten points, name this scandal regarding US military personnel torturing detainees of an Iraqi prison.
Answer: Abu Ghraib prison torture scandal (

4809. This man resisted his initial calling, saying that he was too young to speak; when he did begin his ministry, the people of his hometown tried to kill him, for which God promised destruction on the town of Anathoth. Near the end of his life, this man was forcibly taken to Egypt with his scribe Baruch, who recorded this man’s sayings into a namesake book. For ten points, name this Israelite, often called the “weeping prophet,” the author of the Book of Lamentations.
Answer: Jeremiah

4810. On this island, the ambush of the Four Four Bravo patrol prompted racial violence during Black July. Lourenco de Almeida established a Portuguese fort on this island to counter Jaffna influence. Thanks to the evangelizing of Mahinda, Ashoka’s son, Theravada Buddhism is prominent on this island, contrary to the neighboring mainland. For ten points, name this home island of the Sinhalese and Tamil ethnic groups, a country whose largest city is Colombo.
Answer: Sri Lanka (

4811. One side in this battle halted fire due to a miscommunication about the remaining ammunition; to maintain morale, that side informed its men that the pause was to have breakfast. The direction “you may fire when you are ready, Gridley” was given to begin this battle. In this battle, George Dewey’s U.S. fleet lost one sailor to heatstroke and sunk 8 Spanish ships. For ten points, name this May 1, 1898 battle of the Spanish-American War, fought in the harbor of the Philippine capital city.
Answer: Battle of Manila Bay (do not

4812. Description acceptable. During this event, Captain Arthur Slatter helped kill a charging foe “just thirteen paces from where we stood.” This event was undertaken with hundreds of guides, including the leader’s son Kermit, and it provided the Smithsonian Institution with exhibits for its new Museum of Natural History. Eleven black rhinoceros, 17 lions, and thousands of birds were among the victims of, for ten points, what year-long expedition, begun in 1909 shortly after its leader declined to run for re- election, in which a former U.S. President shot and collected thousands of animals?
Answer: Theodore “Teddy” Roosevelt’s

4813. Henry le Despenser ended this conflict with a victory at North Walsham. A leader of this event was slain while meeting with William Walworth at Smithfield. The Savoy Palace was burned down during this event, in which Simon Sudbury was killed after the cleric John Ball incited protesters to storm the Tower of London. This event was prompted by a poll tax of Richard II. Wat Tyler led, for ten points, what 1381 rebellion of the lower class in England?
Answer: Peasant’s Revolt (or uprising, etc.

4814. A character in this play claims that a sunburn could not make his face any worse looking. In this play, it is said that Arthur’s bosom is the destination of the dead Falstaff. At a charge at Harfleur, this play’s title character declares “Once more unto the breach,” and later uses the phrase “we few, we happy few, we band of brothers” to open the St. Crispin’s Day Speech. For ten points, name this Shakespeare history play about the British king who won the Battle of Agincourt.
Answer: Henry V (do not

4815. Louis-Antoine Beaunier received a royal commission to construct one of these structures to aid the mining industry in the Loire basin. The first of these structures in Paris started at the Gare du Nord. Saint-Etienne was an early center for these structures, which were financed by the Perriere brothers through the Credit Mobilier. In 1937, these systems were nationalized in France under the SNCF, which still runs them today. For ten points, name these structures, which link cities like Lyon and Paris.
Answer: French railways (or railroads)

4816. A city in this present-day country along the Irtysh River was the capital of the self-proclaimed Alash Autonomy. The Semipalatinsk nuclear test site is in this country, as is a location leased until 2050 by its northern neighbor where Sputnik I was launched. This home of the Baikonur Cosmodrome moved its capital from Almaty in 1997. Astana is now the capital of, for ten points, what former Soviet republic, the largest landlocked country in the world?
Answer: Republic of Kazakhstan Second Quarter

4817. This kingdom faced a religious uprising that was led by Beatriz Kimpa Vita and named for Saint Anthony. The first European to meet with this kingdom was Diogo Cao [cow] in 1482, after which its king took the name Joao. After a failed 1914 revolt, this kingdom’s monarchy was abolished and its land assimilated into the colony of Angola. For ten points, name this kingdom that converted to Christianity after meeting the Portuguese and which names a pair of countries in Central Africa.
Answer: Kingdom of Kongo Page 2

4818. Near this city, Robert Abercromby led a counterattack and spiked a series of cannons, though that charge that was quickly defended. A siege of this city ended when Charles O’Hara presented his commander’s sword to Benjamin Lincoln, after Lincoln’s superior refused to accept the weapon. A popular account claims that an army leaving this city played the song “The World Turned Upside Down.” For ten points, name this Virginia city where Charles Cornwallis’s surrender marked the end of the Revolutionary War.
Answer: (Siege/Battle of) Yorktown BONUS: This leader of the French Expeditionary Force marched with George Washington from Newport to Yorktown prior to the siege. At the surrender, this man was first offered the sword by O’Hara. Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau (

4819. This man constructed, and named for himself, a fortified road along the Arabian border. The Edict on Maximum Prices was this ruler’s attempt to combat inflation by replacing the debased denarius. He appointed his valuable ally, the general Maximian, as co-ruler with Galerius and Chlorus as junior rulers. This man’s ascension ended the Crisis of the Third Century and, he ordered the last major persecution of Christians in his empire. For ten points, name this Roman Emperor whose tetrarchy split the empire into four sections.
Answer: Diocletian (or Diocles) BONUS: Diocletian reduced the size of this bodyguard of Roman emperors, although he did keep their prefect as an important official in his empire. They were eventually abolished by Constantine. Praetorian Guard

4820. This singer collaborated with Stevie Wonder on “Ebony and Ivory” and with Michael Jackson on 1983’s “Say Say Say.” In 1984, this man convinced Michael Jackson of the benefit of owning copyrights to songs; Jackson promptly outbid this man for his own catalog of songs. In January 2017, this man sued Sony Music Publishing in another attempt to gain ownership of “The Long and Winding Road” and “Yesterday,” songs on which he shares a writing credit with John Lennon. For ten points, name this bass guitarist for the Beatles.
Answer: (James) Paul McCartney BONUS: To avoid losing millions of pounds to tax, McCartney and the other Beatles founded this corporation, which published new Beatles material starting in

4821. Two answers required. A source of tension between these two countries was one’s use of the phrase “legitimate grievance” to describe the Chushi Gangdruk uprising in the other. These two countries, one of which no longer exists, fought a border war over the Ussuri River. One of these two countries provided half of the investment for the other’s first Five Year Plan. Richard Nixon visited one of these two countries in 1972 in part because of its rivalry with the other. For ten points, name these countries which “split” in the early 1960s, despite being the two largest Communist countries in the world.
Answer: People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union (

4822. Poland was forced to exit this war following the Treaty of Altranstadt, which also provided for the execution of the nobleman Johann Patkul. Shortly after a naval engagement at Grengam, this conflict was ended through The Treaty of Nystad. During this conflict, the Cossack leader Ivan Mazepa joined forces with Charles XII, only to be defeated by the forces of Peter the Great. For ten points, name this 18th century conflict in which Russia defeated the Swedish empire.
Answer: Great Northern War BONUS: Ivan Mazepa and Charles XII alliance at this

4823. In the sixth edition of this work, its author added a new chapter to respond to the criticisms of George Jackson Mivart. Its author was motivated to publish following Alfred Russell Wallace’s paper containing similar ideas. This work doesn’t analyze the human race, which was later tackled by its author’s The Descent of Man. For ten points, name this book that introduced evolution by natural selection, the magnum opus of Charles Darwin.
Answer: On the Origin of Species BONUS: Advocates for Darwin’s work included this man, his “Bulldog,” who debated Samuel Wilberforce at Oxford in

4824. In this country, a series of reforms of higher education proposed by Alain Devaquet was met with mass student protests. An infrastructure project in this country known as the Grand Projects sought to beautify its capital. During periods of cohabitation, a liberal leader of this country worked with Edouard Balladur and Jacques Chirac, a pair of Gaullist prime ministers. For ten points, name this country governed by Francois Mitterrand.
Answer: France (

4825. Sea east of Sweden on which the League conducted most of its trade.
Answer: Baltic Sea

4826. Capital city with a League trading post at the Steelyard until Elizabeth I ended its license.
Answer: London

4827. Kingdom that controlled Jutland and that fought the Hansa for trading rights under Valdemar IV.
Answer: Denmark

4828. 15th century conflict in England in which the League supported the Yorkist side
Answer: Wars of the Roses

4829. City that describes itself today as Free and Hanseatic, and is the 2nd largest in Germany by population
Answer: Hamburg

4830. City with the headquarters of the League in Schleswig-Holstein. It was Kiel.
Answer: Lübeck

4831. Member of the League which was defended by the Livonian Order and is now a national capital with a namesake Gulf
Answer: Riga

4832. Name given to Hansa trading posts. Large ones include the Steelyard and the Peterhof.
Answer: kontor Page 5

4833. Country invaded on September 1, 1939, marking the beginning of the war.
Answer: Poland

4834. Country that faced the Blitz and employed the Royal Air Force.
Answer: United Kingdom (

4835. French line of fortifications that did not account for a blitzkrieg through the Ardennes.
Answer: Maginot line

4836. Small country where General Patton is now buried that was the site of much of the Battle of the Bulge.
Answer: Luxembourg

4837. 1940 evacuation of Allied troops by everything from naval vessels to fishing boats.
Answer: Dunkirk evacuation (

4838. Failed operation to “end the war by Christmas” that wanted to capture Nijmegan [ny-may-hen] Bridge.
Answer: Operation Market Garden (

4839. Name of the Canadian Beach during Operation Overlord.
Answer: Juno

4840. General who gave the reply “Nuts” to a German request to surrender at Bastogne.
Answer: Anthony McAuliffe 20th Century African Leaders Name the...

4841. The region, north of England, that Idi Amin pretended to be the last king of.
Answer: Scotland

4842. Country whose independence was won by Jomo Kenyatta, who then led from Nairobi.
Answer: Kenya

4843. Longtime dictator of Libya who was killed in 2011.
Answer: Muammar al-Gaddafi (or al-Qaddafi)

4844. Country founded by freed American slaves and once led by war criminal Charles Taylor.
Answer: Liberia

4845. Country led by Emperor Haile Selassie, who defended it against Italy.
Answer: Ethiopia

4846. Country, known as the colonial Gold Coast, whose independence was won by Kwame Nkrumah.
Answer: Ghana

4847. Dictator of Congo who renamed his country Zaire and ruled until 1997, when he was overthrown by Laurent Kabila.
Answer: Mobutu Sese Seko (Kuku Ngbendu Wa Za Banga) (or Joseph Desire Mobutu)

4848. Long time ruler of Gabon who shares his last name with a type of drum.
Answer: Omar Bongo Page 6

4849. Some modified Corinthian capitals at this city are shaped like elephants and winged cats. A theater in this city includes statues of Heracles and Aphrodite. A building located above (+) al- Siq at this site has a facade that includes a broken pediment as well as depictions of Isis-Tyche, as well as Castor and Pollux; that building, a tomb for King Aretas IV in this city, is more commonly known as the Treasury, or the Khazneh. (*) For ten points, name this Nabataean capital, a city carved out of rock in modern Jordan.
Answer: Petra

4850. In this battle, one side’s failure to seize the Causeway Heights led to a prompt counterattack from James Scarlett in the South Valley. Colin Campbell’s 93rd Highlander regiment was dubbed the (+) “Thin Red Line” for their resoluteness in this battle. Lord Raglan ordered the Earl of Cardigan’s cavalry to attack the wrong set of Russian batteries in this battle; that disaster was recounted in a (*) poem by Alfred, Lord Tennyson. For ten points, name this battle, part of the Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War, which featured the Charge of the Light Brigade.
Answer: Battle of Balaclava (

4851. A crime is committed on this holiday in the Hercule Poirot story “Murder in the Mews.” The namesake of this holiday is idolized as a distant ancestor of the central family of the novel Martin Chuzzlewit. Evey [ee-vee] (+) Hammond is saved from assault on this holiday in a graphic novel by Alan Moore; a year later, she sets a subway train full of explosives to blow up a government building. The title character of (*) V for Vendetta wears a mask representing the namesake of, for ten points, what British holiday, the subject of the rhyme “Remember, remember, the fifth of November?”
Answer: Guy Fawkes Day and/or Night (

4852. This campaign was reinforced by Eurymedon and Demosthenes, though their men failed to breach the Epipolae walls. A lunar eclipse convinced one side to linger in a harbor during this event, leaving them exposed to attack from (+) Gylippus. The destruction of the Hermai statues shortly before this campaign led to the recall of one of its leaders, (*) Alcibiades [al-sih-by-ah- deez]. For ten points, name this disastrous campaign of the Peloponnesian War in which Athens tried to invade a large Mediterranean island.
Answer: Sicilian (or Sicily) Campaign or Expedition

4853. The subject of one of this artist’s paintings wears a medallion given to him by Alexander the Great while resting his hand on a bust of an ancient poet. This artist’s numerous self- portraits include one etching with his wife, (+) Saskia. He included a young girl in a yellow dress with a chicken hanging from her belt in his portrait of arquebusiers under the command of (*) Frans Banning Cocq. For ten points, name this Dutch artist of “The Anatomy Lesson” of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp and “The Night Watch”.
Answer: Rembrandt van Rijn Page 7

4854. This man gave a press conference that opened with John Quinn quoting Ben Franklin’s “A republic, sir, if you can keep it” anecdote. Later in the press conference, this man discussed a tax deduction for giving his (+) Vice Presidential papers to the government and misspoke, suggesting that John Ehrlichman was guilty until proven innocent. The press conference climaxed with this man explaining “I have earned everything I have got” after noting that (*) “people have got to know whether or not their President is a crook.” For ten points, name this President who was grilled by newspaper editors in 1973 over the Watergate scandal.
Answer: Richard Nixon

4855. During this battle, Simon Bolivar Buckner was killed by an explosion that sent coral into his body. Underage children were drafted into the Iron and Blood Imperial Corps in preparation for this battle. The battleship (+) Yamato was sunk in this battle, which was nicknamed the “typhoon of steel” due to the heavy incidence of kamikaze attacks. During this battle, one side launched Operation Iceberg in an attempt to gain a (*) base of operations for the invasion of the Japanese mainland. For ten points, name this 1945 battle in the Ryukyu Islands in the conclusion of the Allied island hopping campaign.
Answer: Battle of Okinawa

4856. An invasion of this country was justified through Article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee. Voters from this country repeatedly rejected the Annan Plans of reunification. Nikos Sampson was placed in power in this country by the EOKA attempting to fulfill the idea of (+) enosis. Operation Attila was an attack on this country following the overthrow of Archbishop Makarios, and fighting in this country led to the creation of the (*) Green Line and a UN buffer zone. For ten points, name this Mediterranean island country divided into zones dominated by Greek and Turkish partisans.
Answer: Cyprus

4857. One instance of this action was caused when someone threw a brick at a crowd led by Jan Zelivsky; Wenceslaus IV died of shock after hearing about that event. In another instance of this action, Vilem Slavata and Jaroslav Martinitz were (+) saved, according to enemy Protestants, by a pile of horse manure; that instance of this action occurred after the violation of the Letter of Majesty, which helped start the (*) Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this violent action that took place in 1419 and 1618 in Prague.
Answer: (First and/or Second) defenestrations of Prague (

4858. A naval victory at the Battle of Çeşme [[JESH-meh]] helped this monarch defeat the Ottoman Empire. This monarch suppressed Pugachev’s Rebellion and helped Stanislaw Poniatowski [[POHN-yuh-TOF-skee]] become king of Poland. With the aid of Grigori Potemkin, this monarch annexed the Crimean Peninsula. A patron of the arts, this monarch’s collection became the basis for the Hermitage Museum. For the point, name this Empress of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (

4859. Possibly the deadliest ship accident in history occurred during this conflict when a storm destroyed over 300 ships off Cape Hermaeum [[her-MEH-uhm]], killing one hundred thousand men. A deployable bridge called the corvus was invented during this conflict to allow one side to make up for their naval disadvantage. The Battle of the Aegaetes [[ay-GEH- teez]] Islands sealed the fate of Sicily in, for the point, what initial conflict between the Romans and the Carthaginians?
Answer: First Punic War (

4860. This statesman briefly served as the initial chairman for the 9/11 Commission. Along with Le Duc Tho, this man won the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts in negotiating a ceasefire in Vietnam. In 1971, this man embarked on a secret trip to meet with Premier Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong, before returning on a public trip the following year. For the point, name this German-born U.S. Secretary of State who served under Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford.
Answer: Henry Kissinger (or Henry Alfred Kissinger; or Heinz Alfred Kissinger)

4861. One of these animals named Jack served as the dedicated assistant to a disabled railway signalman in the Cape Province. One of these animals dressed in a French uniform was legendarily hanged by the citizens of Hartlepool after it was the sole survivor of a Napoleonic-era naval battle. A trial named for this animal concerned John Scopes' teaching of evolution in a Tennessee public school. For the point, name these primates split into "Old World" and "New World" varieties, the former lacking a tail.
Answer: Monkey (

4862. This state lost Dalmatia after the pretender Ladislaus [[lawd-EH-sloh]] of Naples ceded it to Venice. John Zápolya [[ZAH-pol-yah]] was crowned king of this country under the protection of the Ottoman Empire after one battle. The Military Frontier was established by the Habsburgs in this country, which was ruled during its height by Matthias Corvinus. For the point, name this kingdom that united with Austria in 1867 to form the Dual Monarchy.
Answer: Kingdom of Hungary (

4863. A "Divine Narrative" tells how, on his deathbed, this man offered his only possession, half of a myrobalan [[mee-roh-BAH-lahn]] fruit, to the Sangha community. The treatment of prisoners-of-war, respect for animal life, and conduct of Mahamatra officers are relayed in this ruler's rock pillar edicts. The bloodiness of the Kalinga Wars facilitated this leader's conversion to Buddhism. The son of Bindusara was, for the point, which "great" Indian ruler of the Mauryan Empire?
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Ashoka Maurya)

4864. This leader’s expedition into Armenia saw the defection of Tigranes [[tih-GRAH- neez]] the Younger. This general's son Sextus ruled Sicily independently before being crushed by Marcus Agrippa. This leader's early success under his mentor Sulla led to the first of his three triumphs, after which he united with Crassus and another leader in the First Triumvirate. Dying shortly after his decisive loss at Pharsalus, for the point, who was this "Great" Roman politician and rival of Julius Caesar?
Answer: Pompey the Great (or Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus

4865. This monarch was defeated by rebels at Carberry Hill after an unpopular marriage and led troops against Regent Moray after escaping Loch Leven Castle. The Casket Letters implicated this monarch in the murder of Lord Darnley. Spymaster Francis Walsingham uncovered collusion between this monarch and Roberto Ridolfi, though she would not be executed until after the 1586 Babington Plot was exposed. For the point, name this Catholic ruler who was at the center of numerous plots to depose her cousin, Queen Elizabeth I.
Answer: Mary, Queen of Scots (

4866. The German advisor Otto Braun was discredited and exiled following this event's Zunyi Conference for favoring conventional warfare in favor of guerilla tactics. "Encirclement Campaigns" of Chiang Kai-Shek led to this five thousand mile expedition by the Communists to the Shaanxi [[SHAHN-she]] province. Troops under Zhou Enlai [[ZHOH EN-"LIE"]] and Mao Zedong participated in, for the point, what year-long retreat by the Red Army during the Chinese Civil War?
Answer: The Long March (

4867. An assassin hired by these people, Jean de Poltrot [[pohl-TROH]], killed the Duke of Guise [[GEEZ]] by pretending to be a deserter during the siege of Orleans [[ohr-leh-AHN]]. Under the influence of the devout Catherine de' Medici, Charles IX [[the ninth]] ordered a purge of these people in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The Edict of Nantes [[NAHNT]] provided limited rights to, for the point, what group of Protestants in early-modern France?
Answer: Huguenots (

4868. In this country's region of Butana, the city of Meroë [[MEH-roh-ee]] served as the capital of the Kushite kingdom. Herbert Kitchener engineered a victory at the Battle of Omdurman in this nation during the Mahdi War, which saw the fall of this nation's capital near the convergence of the White and Blue Nile. For the point, name this African nation, home to ancient Nubian kingdoms, that lies directly south of Egypt.
Answer: Republic of Sudan (or Jumhūriyyat as-Sūdān

4869. The importation of craftsmen from this region by Prince Shōtoku led to the founding of the world's oldest company, the construction-focused Kongō Gumi. Alluding to the work of Chinese historian Sima Qian [[SEE-muh CHEE-ahn]], a king of this region ordered the Samguk Sagi, a chronicle of its Three Kingdoms period. Sejong the Great created this region's alphabet, Hangul. For the point, name this formerly united East Asian peninsula whose Admiral Yi defeated a Japanese invasion with "Turtle Ships."
Answer: Korea (

4870. In the American South, the Ku Klux Klan openly burned this group's album following their frontman's comment that "[this band] was bigger than Jesus." Over thirty percent of the U.S. viewed this rock group's appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show, fueling a namesake "Mania" in America. George Harrison, Ringo Starr, Paul McCartney, and John Lennon made up, for the point, which highly-influential British band of the 1960s?
Answer: The Beatles

4871. The region in which this city is located was known in Algonquin [[al-GON-kwin]] as Cohongarooton [[koh-hong-ah-ROO-tahn]]. In 1983, a bomb planted by the "Armed Resistance Unit" exploded at Fort McNair, the Navy Yard, and another building in this city. The attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan occurred outside a Hilton in this city. For the point, name this city which houses the Watergate Hotel, the U.S. Senate, and the White House.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

4872. A 19th-century folk magic ritual involved burying these creatures in miniature coffins underneath Finnish churches. The collective noise of these creatures led to a namesake "battle" in Windham, Connecticut. OSS member John Spence claimed that he earned a nickname based on this animal while serving as an underwater operator, and that term now refers to Navy SEALS in general. For the point, name these amphibians whose "Poison Dart" variety was used by Native Americans in weaponry.
Answer: Frog (

4873. An often quoted saying by this man, chronicled by John Montresor, may have instead been taken from Joseph Addison's historical play Cato. The British charged this man with being part of a corps of saboteurs who were believed to have started the Great New York Fire of 1776 while working for the Continental Army. The statement "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country" was said by, for the point, which American spy during the Revolutionary War?
Answer: Nathan Hale

4874. Johann Strauss dedicated one of these works to the victor at the Battle of Custoza, Field Marshal Joseph Radetzky. Used for the play Ruin of Athens, Ludwig van Beethoven wrote one of these works inspired by the music of the Janissaries, named for the "Turkish" people. A modified brass tuba created specifically for this type of musical piece is named for its "king," John Philip Sousa. For the point, name this musical piece meant to accompany soldiers moving in time.
Answer: March (

4875. After capturing this city, the founder of the Cocom dynasty, Hunac Ceel supposedly threw himself down its sacred cenote [[seh-NOH-teh]] in an act of courage. Nearby this city's Temple of the Bearded Man is the largest preserved ball court in Mesoamerica. El Castillo [[cah-STEE-yoh]] contains a temple complex in this city dedicated to the feathered serpent Kukulcán [[koo-kool-KAHN]]. For the point, name this Late Classical Mayan city in the Yucatan.
Answer: Chichen Itza

4876. Alexander Lukashenko once bragged that these items from Belarus did not contain any toilet paper. Konrad Adenauer [[ad-den-OW-uh]] created a soy-based version of this item due to food shortages in World War One. Otto von Bismarck compared these items to laws, saying that it is better if the public does not see them being made. The “doctor’s” variety of this foodstuff in the Soviet Union often contained additives like eggs and milk. For the point, name this meat product, whose kielbasa [[keel-BAH-sah]] variant originated in Poland.
Answer: Sausages (

4877. Herman Wirth, a member of this organization, was financed by it to translate the Ura Linda Chronicle and put this group's resources toward searching for Atlantis. The "amateur völkisch" [[FOLK-ish]] Ahnenerbe [[AH-nen-ehr-buh]] was developed by this organization to research "ancestral heritage" and was led by SS-commander Heinrich Himmler. Aryans were promoted as the master race by, for the point, what Fascist political party of early-twentieth century Germany?
Answer: Nazi Party (

4878. In Jared Diamond's Collapse, he describes how the inhabitants of this island left it destitute due to a series of wars and poor agricultural management, making it the ideal example of societal collapse in isolation. Establishing the hamlet of Anakena, settlers from modern day French Polynesia likely colonized this island using outrigger canoes. The Rapa Nui are the natives of, for the point, which Pacific Island famed for its moai [[MOH-"eye"]] statues?
Answer: Easter Island (

4879. An Arabic deity of this domain was elevated to prominence by a former high priest- turned-Roman Emperor, Elagabalus [[EH-luh-GAH-buh-lus]]. The Sapa Inca was considered the son of a god of this domain, another of which is considered the ancestor of the Emperor of Japan. A "disc" of this object was made the chief deity of Egypt by the Pharaoh Akhenaten. Inti and Amaterasu are, for the point, gods of what historically venerated celestial object?
Answer: Sun (or Solar Deity

4880. This event may have originated from pigs meant to feed soldiers stationed at Camp Funston. Heavy newspaper coverage of an illness experienced by Alfonso XIII [[the thirteenth]] led to the most common name for this event. The Anti-Mask League of San Francisco was formed to oppose policies meant to stem the spread of this pandemic. For the point, name this pandemic commonly associated with an Iberian country, during which millions of people died in the aftermath of World War One.
Answer: Spanish Flu pandemic (

4881. A theorist in this style of warfare named Menno van Coehoorn [[KOH-horn]] developed principals of it like "Active Defense" and the "Denial of Terrain." Sébastien de Vauban [[vah-BONN]] perfected a parallel trench system to keep constant pressure on the target during one of these events while still having reserves safe from defensive fire. Sun Tzu states the last resort in warfare is to do, for the point, what strategic encirclement meant to capture a city by means of attrition?
Answer: Siege Warfare (

4882. The pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee hid in this nation's port after being pursued by the British navy, but was ordered to leave after 72 hours by the Hague Convention. To combat the urban guerilla group known as the Tupamaros, the Colorado party president Juan María Bordaberry called a state of emergency and later dissolved Parliament. This nation gained independence as the "Oriental Republic" following the Cisplatine War between neighboring Argentina and Brazil. The Treaty of Montevideo was signed in, for the point, what small South American country?
Answer: Oriental Republic of Uruguay

4883. This movement called for a transition to a national syndicalist government in their founding manifesto, the Twenty-Seven Points. The government of Manuel Azaña [[ah-ZAHN- nyah]] imprisoned and executed an early leader of this movement, José Antonio Primo de Rivera. This party integrated the Carlists through the Unification degree in 1937. The sole legal political faction in Spain for over forty years was, for the point, which party led by Francisco Franco?
Answer: Falange Española Tradicionalista (

4884. In these people's folklore, they displaced a race of giants called Tuniit, which modern scholars identify as the Dorset culture. This culture group descended from the Thule people, and several groups of this culture were forced to migrate south due to the disappearance of the bowhead whale. This people's first well-documented contact with Europeans occurred when Martin Frobisher landed near Iqaluit [[ee-KAHL-oo-it]] on Baffin Island. For the point, name these indigenous people, who are often erroneously called Eskimos.
Answer: Inuit (

4885. This man committed a mass purge of Tiwa villages in the Tiguex [[tee-GWEKS]] War. Under this man's command, García López de Cárdenas became the first European to reach the Grand Canyon. This Governor of New Galicia followed the course of the Colorado River during his largest expedition. The search for the Seven Cities of Gold was undertaken by, for the point, which conquistador who explored much of the modern southwestern U.S. in the 16th century?
Answer: Francisco Vázquez de Coronado (or Francisco Vázquez de Coronado y Luján)

4886. This scientist and his close friend and countryman Leonard Euler [["OILER"]] co- developed a painful method of checking blood pressure with a glass tube as well as an equation calculating the load-bearing capacity of a beam. This man's most famous discovery states that an increase in a fluid's speed is simultaneous to a decrease in the fluid's pressure. For the point, name this Swiss mathematician whose namesake "principle" underlies the function of carburetors and airplane wings.
Answer: Daniel Bernoulli (

4887. Due to his opposition of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, this senator left the Democratic Party for the newly-formed Constitutional Union Party. As governor, this man was unable to stop his state from joining the Confederacy, despite the legendary status he attained following his victory at the Battle of San Jacinto [[HAH-seen-toh]]. For the point, name this first president of the Republic of Texas, and namesake of the state’s most populous city.
Answer: Samuel Houston

4888. Members of this organization started a drunken bar brawl with Mexican-Americans in “Bloody Christmas.” Mass corruption in this organization was exposed by the Rampart scandal. The concept of the "thin blue line" was devised by a leader of this organization. Stacey Koon, a member of this organization, beat a man who was speeding in a truck, sparking the Rodney King riots. For the point, name this largest California police department.
Answer: Los Angeles Police Department (or LAPD

4889. During his tenure at the Virginia Military Institute, this man was nicknamed "fool" by several students, though he later earned the nickname "Old Blue Light" for his zeal in battle. Though he opened with a tactical defeat at Kernstown, this man successfully outmaneuvered several larger Union armies in the Shenandoah Campaign. Called "my right arm" by Robert E. Lee, for the point, who was this Confederate general who was killed by friendly fire at Chancellorsville?
Answer: Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson (or Thomas Jonathan Jackson)

4890. This park's 50 square mile "Zone of Death" is a region where you can theoretically get away with murder in legal scholar Brian Kalt's thought experiment. Frank Jay Haynes became the official photographer of this park, recording the first visit to it by a sitting President after Rutherford B. Hayes travelled there while fighting poor health. The Washburn Expedition of 1870 explored this parks Upper and Lower Geyser Basin, naming the largest one "Old Faithful." The oldest national park in the US is, for the point, which reserve which lies in Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana?
Answer: Yellowstone

4891. In one work set during this war, the surgeon Rinaldi introduces the main character to the nurse Catherine Barkley. Frederic Henry serves as an ambulance driver during this war in a novel which earned the ire of the Italian government for its depiction of the Battle of Caporetto. For the point, name this war which serves as the setting of Ernest Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms and created the “lost generation.”
Answer: World War One (

4892. After openly decrying this program as "wasteful spending" in a letter to James Abrahamson, scientist Aldric Saucier was dismissed following a revocation of whistleblowing privileges by Dick Cheney. As a part of this larger program, General Daniel O. Graham promoted "Smart Rocks," a plan to use heat-seeking nuclear missiles to intercept any potential Soviet warheads emitting large amounts of energy. For the point, name this Reagan- era "initiative" derisively nicknamed for a George Lucas sci-fi film franchise.
Answer: Strategic Defense Initiative (or SDI

4893. This attorney served as a majority leader in the Arizona State Senate before being appointed to the Supreme Court. This justice wrote the majority opinions in Grutter v. Bollinger and Hamdi v. Rumsfeld. This Associate Justice retired after the confirmation of Samuel Alito [[ah-LEE-toh]] in 2005, and this woman was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom four years later. For the point, name this first female Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Answer: Sandra Day O’Connor (

4894. A naval victory at the Battle of Çeşme [[JESH-meh]] helped this monarch defeat the Ottoman Empire. This monarch suppressed Pugachev’s Rebellion and helped Stanislaw Poniatowski [[POHN-yuh-TOF-skee]] become king of Poland. With the aid of Grigori Potemkin, this monarch annexed the Crimean Peninsula. A patron of the arts, this monarch’s collection became the basis for the Hermitage Museum. For the point, name this Empress of Russia.
Answer: Catherine the Great (

4895. Possibly the deadliest ship accident in history occurred during this conflict when a storm destroyed over 300 ships off Cape Hermaeum [[her-MEH-uhm]], killing one hundred thousand men. A deployable bridge called the corvus was invented during this conflict to allow one side to make up for their naval disadvantage. The Battle of the Aegaetes [[ay-GEH- teez]] Islands sealed the fate of Sicily in, for the point, what initial conflict between the Romans and the Carthaginians?
Answer: First Punic War (

4896. During the War of the Austrian Succession, British troops captured the fortress of Louisbourg in this modern province, leading to outrage when it was handed back to France later. An expulsion of people from this province was ordered by Robert Monckton, and those settlers became known as Cajuns when arriving in Louisiana. For the point, name this Canadian province, which under French rule was called Acadia.
Answer: Nova Scotia [[SKOH-shuh]] (

4897. This speech claims that "a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a variety of evils." This speech warns of the entangling alliances in Europe and the degeneration of U.S. politics into competing factions, specifically targeting the rising Democratic-Republican and Federalist parties. Weariness of public life and a desire to return to Mount Vernon led to, for the point, what "Address" given by the first president of the United States?
Answer: George Washington's Farewell Address (

4898. This state lost Dalmatia after the pretender Ladislaus [[lawd-EH-sloh]] of Naples ceded it to Venice. John Zápolya [[ZAH-pol-yah]] was crowned king of this country under the protection of the Ottoman Empire after one battle. The Military Frontier was established by the Habsburgs in this country, which was ruled during its height by Matthias Corvinus. For the point, name this kingdom that united with Austria in 1867 to form the Dual Monarchy.
Answer: Kingdom of Hungary (

4899. This scientist and his close friend and countryman Leonard Euler [["OILER"]] co- developed a painful method of checking blood pressure with a glass tube as well as an equation calculating the load-bearing capacity of a beam. This man's most famous discovery states that an increase in a fluid's speed is simultaneous to a decrease in the fluid's pressure. For the point, name this Swiss mathematician whose namesake "principle" underlies the function of carburetors and airplane wings.
Answer: Daniel Bernoulli (

4900. This leader’s expedition into Armenia saw the defection of Tigranes [[tih-GRAH- neez]] the Younger. This general's son Sextus ruled Sicily independently before being crushed by Marcus Agrippa. This leader's early success under his mentor Sulla led to the first of his three triumphs, after which he united with Crassus and another leader in the First Triumvirate. Dying shortly after his decisive loss at Pharsalus, for the point, who was this "Great" Roman politician and rival of Julius Caesar?
Answer: Pompey the Great (or Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus

4901. This monarch was defeated by rebels at Carberry Hill after an unpopular marriage and led troops against Regent Moray after escaping Loch Leven Castle. The Casket Letters implicated this monarch in the murder of Lord Darnley. Spymaster Francis Walsingham uncovered collusion between this monarch and Roberto Ridolfi, though she would not be executed until after the 1586 Babington Plot was exposed. For the point, name this Catholic ruler who was at the center of numerous plots to depose her cousin, Queen Elizabeth I.
Answer: Mary, Queen of Scots (

4902. The German advisor Otto Braun was discredited and exiled following this event's Zunyi Conference for favoring conventional warfare in favor of guerilla tactics. "Encirclement Campaigns" of Chiang Kai-Shek led to this five thousand mile expedition by the Communists to the Shaanxi [[SHAHN-she]] province. Troops under Zhou Enlai [[ZHOH EN-"LIE"]] and Mao Zedong participated in, for the point, what year-long retreat by the Red Army during the Chinese Civil War?
Answer: The Long March (

4903. An assassin hired by these people, Jean de Poltrot [[pohl-TROH]], killed the Duke of Guise [[GEEZ]] by pretending to be a deserter during the siege of Orleans [[ohr-leh-AHN]]. Under the influence of the devout Catherine de' Medici, Charles IX [[the ninth]] ordered a purge of these people in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The Edict of Nantes [[NAHNT]] provided limited rights to, for the point, what group of Protestants in early-modern France?
Answer: Huguenots (

4904. In this country's region of Butana, the city of Meroë [[MEH-roh-ee]] served as the capital of the Kushite kingdom. Herbert Kitchener engineered a victory at the Battle of Omdurman in this nation during the Mahdi War, which saw the fall of this nation's capital near the convergence of the White and Blue Nile. For the point, name this African nation, home to ancient Nubian kingdoms, that lies directly south of Egypt.
Answer: Republic of Sudan (or Jumhūriyyat as-Sūdān

4905. In these people's folklore, they displaced a race of giants called Tuniit, which modern scholars identify as the Dorset culture. This culture group descended from the Thule people, and several groups of this culture were forced to migrate south due to the disappearance of the bowhead whale. This people's first well-documented contact with Europeans occurred when Martin Frobisher landed near Iqaluit [[ee-KAHL-oo-it]] on Baffin Island. For the point, name these indigenous people, who are often erroneously called Eskimos.
Answer: Inuit (

4906. Due to a case of unrequited love, the "Cossack Countess" Olga Janina attempted to kill this man. This man composed a symphony celebrating the July Revolution in his youth, and incorporated traditional Roma tunes in his Hungarian Rhapsodies. Heinrich Heine [["HIGH"- nuh]] coined a phrase named for this composer to describe the hysteria that followed him wherever he went. A namesake "mania" was caused by, for the point, which composer of the Transcendental Études?
Answer: Franz Liszt (or Liszt Ferencz

4907. This man committed a mass purge of Tiwa villages in the Tiguex [[tee-GWEKS]] War. Under this man's command, García López de Cárdenas became the first European to reach the Grand Canyon. This Governor of New Galicia followed the course of the Colorado River during his largest expedition. The search for the Seven Cities of Gold was undertaken by, for the point, which conquistador who explored much of the modern southwestern U.S. in the 16th century?
Answer: Francisco Vázquez de Coronado (or Francisco Vázquez de Coronado y Luján)

4908. A 19th-century folk magic ritual involved burying these creatures in miniature coffins underneath Finnish churches. The collective noise of these creatures led to a namesake "battle" in Windham, Connecticut. OSS member John Spence claimed that he earned a nickname based on this animal while serving as an underwater operator, and that term now refers to Navy SEALS in general. For the point, name these amphibians whose "Poison Dart" variety was used by Native Americans in weaponry.
Answer: Frog (

4909. An often quoted saying by this man, chronicled by John Montresor, may have instead been taken from Joseph Addison's historical play Cato. The British charged this man with being part of a corps of saboteurs who were believed to have started the Great New York Fire of 1776 while working for the Continental Army. The statement "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country" was said by, for the point, which American spy during the Revolutionary War?
Answer: Nathan Hale

4910. Johann Strauss dedicated one of these works to the victor at the Battle of Custoza, Field Marshal Joseph Radetzky. Used for the play Ruin of Athens, Ludwig van Beethoven wrote one of these works inspired by the music of the Janissaries, named for the "Turkish" people. A modified brass tuba created specifically for this type of musical piece is named for its "king," John Philip Sousa. For the point, name this musical piece meant to accompany soldiers moving in time.
Answer: March (

4911. After capturing this city, the founder of the Cocom dynasty, Hunac Ceel supposedly threw himself down its sacred cenote [[seh-NOH-teh]] in an act of courage. Nearby this city's Temple of the Bearded Man is the largest preserved ball court in Mesoamerica. El Castillo [[cah-STEE-yoh]] contains a temple complex in this city dedicated to the feathered serpent Kukulcán [[koo-kool-KAHN]]. For the point, name this Late Classical Mayan city in the Yucatan.
Answer: Chichen Itza

4912. A "Divine Narrative" tells how, on his deathbed, this man offered his only possession, half of a myrobalan [[mee-roh-BAH-lahn]] fruit, to the Sangha community. The treatment of prisoners-of-war, respect for animal life, and conduct of Mahamatra officers are relayed in this ruler's rock pillar edicts. The bloodiness of the Kalinga Wars facilitated this leader's conversion to Buddhism. The son of Bindusara was, for the point, which "great" Indian ruler of the Mauryan Empire?
Answer: Ashoka the Great (or Ashoka Maurya)

4913. Herman Wirth, a member of this organization, was financed by it to translate the Ura Linda Chronicle and put this group's resources toward searching for Atlantis. The "amateur völkisch" [[FOLK-ish]] Ahnenerbe [[AH-nen-ehr-buh]] was developed by this organization to research "ancestral heritage" and was led by SS-commander Heinrich Himmler. Aryans were promoted as the master race by, for the point, what Fascist political party of early-twentieth century Germany?
Answer: Nazi Party (

4914. In Jared Diamond's Collapse, he describes how the inhabitants of this island left it destitute due to a series of wars and poor agricultural management, making it the ideal example of societal collapse in isolation. Establishing the hamlet of Anakena, settlers from modern day French Polynesia likely colonized this island using outrigger canoes. The Rapa Nui are the natives of, for the point, which Pacific Island famed for its moai [[MOH-"eye"]] statues?
Answer: Easter Island (

4915. An Arabic deity of this domain was elevated to prominence by a former high priest- turned-Roman Emperor, Elagabalus [[EH-luh-GAH-buh-lus]]. The Sapa Inca was considered the son of a god of this domain, another of which is considered the ancestor of the Emperor of Japan. A "disc" of this object was made the chief deity of Egypt by the Pharaoh Akhenaten. Inti and Amaterasu are, for the point, gods of what historically venerated celestial object?
Answer: Sun (or Solar Deity

4916. This event may have originated from pigs meant to feed soldiers stationed at Camp Funston. Heavy newspaper coverage of an illness experienced by Alfonso XIII [[the thirteenth]] led to the most common name for this event. The Anti-Mask League of San Francisco was formed to oppose policies meant to stem the spread of this pandemic. For the point, name this pandemic commonly associated with an Iberian country, during which millions of people died in the aftermath of World War One.
Answer: Spanish Flu pandemic (

4917. A theorist in this style of warfare named Menno van Coehoorn [[KOH-horn]] developed principals of it like "Active Defense" and the "Denial of Terrain." Sébastien de Vauban [[vah-BONN]] perfected a parallel trench system to keep constant pressure on the target during one of these events while still having reserves safe from defensive fire. Sun Tzu states the last resort in warfare is to do, for the point, what strategic encirclement meant to capture a city by means of attrition?
Answer: Siege Warfare (

4918. The pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee hid in this nation's port after being pursued by the British navy, but was ordered to leave after 72 hours by the Hague Convention. To combat the urban guerilla group known as the Tupamaros, the Colorado party president Juan María Bordaberry called a state of emergency and later dissolved Parliament. This nation gained independence as the "Oriental Republic" following the Cisplatine War between neighboring Argentina and Brazil. The Treaty of Montevideo was signed in, for the point, what small South American country?
Answer: Oriental Republic of Uruguay

4919. This movement called for a transition to a national syndicalist government in their founding manifesto, the Twenty-Seven Points. The government of Manuel Azaña [[ah-ZAHN- nyah]] imprisoned and executed an early leader of this movement, José Antonio Primo de Rivera. This party integrated the Carlists through the Unification degree in 1937. The sole legal political faction in Spain for over forty years was, for the point, which party led by Francisco Franco?
Answer: Falange Española Tradicionalista (

4920. The importation of craftsmen from this region by Prince Shōtoku led to the founding of the world's oldest company, the construction-focused Kongō Gumi. Alluding to the work of Chinese historian Sima Qian [[SEE-muh CHEE-ahn]], a king of this region ordered the Samguk Sagi, a chronicle of its Three Kingdoms period. Sejong the Great created this region's alphabet, Hangul. For the point, name this formerly united East Asian peninsula whose Admiral Yi defeated a Japanese invasion with "Turtle Ships."
Answer: Korea (

4921. The region in which this city is located was known in Algonquin [[al-GON-kwin]] as Cohongarooton [[koh-hong-ah-ROO-tahn]]. In 1983, a bomb planted by the "Armed Resistance Unit" exploded at Fort McNair, the Navy Yard, and another building in this city. The attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan occurred outside a Hilton in this city. For the point, name this city which houses the Watergate Hotel, the U.S. Senate, and the White House.
Answer: Washington, D.C. (

4922. Alexander Lukashenko once bragged that these items from Belarus did not contain any toilet paper. Konrad Adenauer [[ad-den-OW-uh]] created a soy-based version of this item due to food shortages in World War One. Otto von Bismarck compared these items to laws, saying that it is better if the public does not see them being made. The “doctor’s” variety of this foodstuff in the Soviet Union often contained additives like eggs and milk. For the point, name this meat product, whose kielbasa [[keel-BAH-sah]] variant originated in Poland.
Answer: Sausages (

4923. Due to his opposition of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, this senator left the Democratic Party for the newly-formed Constitutional Union Party. As governor, this man was unable to stop his state from joining the Confederacy, despite the legendary status he attained following his victory at the Battle of San Jacinto [[HAH-seen-toh]]. For the point, name this first president of the Republic of Texas, and namesake of the state’s most populous city.
Answer: Samuel Houston

4924. Members of this organization started a drunken bar brawl with Mexican-Americans in “Bloody Christmas.” Mass corruption in this organization was exposed by the Rampart scandal. The concept of the "thin blue line" was devised by a leader of this organization. Stacey Koon, a member of this organization, beat a man who was speeding in a truck, sparking the Rodney King riots. For the point, name this largest California police department.
Answer: Los Angeles Police Department (or LAPD

4925. During his tenure at the Virginia Military Institute, this man was nicknamed "fool" by several students, though he later earned the nickname "Old Blue Light" for his zeal in battle. Though he opened with a tactical defeat at Kernstown, this man successfully outmaneuvered several larger Union armies in the Shenandoah Campaign. Called "my right arm" by Robert E. Lee, for the point, who was this Confederate general who was killed by friendly fire at Chancellorsville?
Answer: Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson (or Thomas Jonathan Jackson)

4926. This park's 50 square mile "Zone of Death" is a region where you can theoretically get away with murder in legal scholar Brian Kalt's thought experiment. Frank Jay Haynes became the official photographer of this park, recording the first visit to it by a sitting President after Rutherford B. Hayes travelled there while fighting poor health. The Washburn Expedition of 1870 explored this parks Upper and Lower Geyser Basin, naming the largest one "Old Faithful." The oldest national park in the US is, for the point, which reserve which lies in Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana?
Answer: Yellowstone

4927. In one work set during this war, the surgeon Rinaldi introduces the main character to the nurse Catherine Barkley. Frederic Henry serves as an ambulance driver during this war in a novel which earned the ire of the Italian government for its depiction of the Battle of Caporetto. For the point, name this war which serves as the setting of Ernest Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms and created the “lost generation.”
Answer: World War One (

4928. After openly decrying this program as "wasteful spending" in a letter to James Abrahamson, scientist Aldric Saucier was dismissed following a revocation of whistleblowing privileges by Dick Cheney. As a part of this larger program, General Daniel O. Graham promoted "Smart Rocks," a plan to use heat-seeking nuclear missiles to intercept any potential Soviet warheads emitting large amounts of energy. For the point, name this Reagan- era "initiative" derisively nicknamed for a George Lucas sci-fi film franchise.
Answer: Strategic Defense Initiative (or SDI

4929. This attorney served as a majority leader in the Arizona State Senate before being appointed to the Supreme Court. This justice wrote the majority opinions in Grutter v. Bollinger and Hamdi v. Rumsfeld. This Associate Justice retired after the confirmation of Samuel Alito [[ah-LEE-toh]] in 2005, and this woman was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom four years later. For the point, name this first female Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Answer: Sandra Day O’Connor (

4930. The Germanic Heruli tribe sacked this city, looting its Stoa Poikile [[stoh-AH poh-ee- KEE-leh]]. The Sacred Way connected this city's district of Keremeikos to nearby Eleusis [[eh- LOO-siss]], where the Eleusinian [[eh-loo-SIH-nee-an]] Mysteries occurred. This city rebuilt its "Long Walls" after they were torn down by the victorious Spartans during the Peloponnesian War. The Acropolis contains the Parthenon of, for the point, what Greek city- state?
Answer: Athens (or Athenai)

4931. Eighteen years after the first meeting in this city, a similar assembly was called for in Serdica. After his conversion to Christianity, Constantine summoned Christian bishops for a meeting in this city. Some of the decisions made at that meeting in this city included settling the date on which Easter should be celebrated and a namesake creed. For the point, name this Bithynian [[bih-THIN-ee-an]] city that hosted two councils for the early Catholic church.
Answer: Nicaea [[nye-SEE-ah]] (be lenient on pronunciation

4932. He's not Tito, but this world leader's "Third Way" foreign policy courted both the U.S. and Soviet Union. Several of this leader's right-wing supporters killed Montoneros in the Ezeiza [[eh-ZEH-zah]] Massacre. This man's wife died of cancer after helping establish "The Children's Republic" theme park near Buenos Aires. The descamisados supported this man and his third wife, President Isabela. For the point, name this Argentine populist and president.
Answer: Juan Perón (or Juan Domingo Perón)

4933. This structure's nickname may derive from a boxer named Caunt or an engineer named Hall. Augustus Pugin [[PYOO-jin]] designed this landmark as part of Charles Barry's rebuilding project following an 1834 fire. A melody that is emitted from this landmark every fifteen minutes is known as the "Westminster Quarters," and the sound of this structure's hourly ringing introduces news on both ITV and the BBC. For the point, give this common name for the Great Bell of the clock tower on London's Palace of Westminster.
Answer: Big Ben (

4934. While president, this reformer published articles anonymously in the Ileri [[ee-LEH- ree]] newspaper to promote nationalism. U.S. education reformer John Dewey was invited by this man to his nation in the mid-1920s. The Sheik Said [[SAH-eed]] rebellion, the first major Kurdish revolt, occurred during this man's administration. The Ottoman Empire was formally ended by, for the point, what reformer, the first president of the Republic of Turkey?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

4935. A member of a cadet branch of this dynasty, Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies, provided asylum for Pope Pius IX [[the Ninth]] after his ousting by the short-lived Roman Republic. The One Hundred Days of Napoleon briefly interrupted a "Restoration" named for this dynasty. The longest reigning monarch in European history, the "Sun King" Louis XIV [[the Fourteenth]] was of this dynasty. The Kingdoms of France and Spain were once controlled by, for the point, what dynasty of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]]?
Answer: House of Bourbon (or Bourbon dynasty; or Bourbons)

4936. A network named for this good is used by economists to describe a "Chinese Commonwealth," closely linking the PRC's business sector with that of Southeast Asia. Lamination of this good was performed by the Japanese to create the yumi bows wielded by feudal-era samurai. The introduction of paper by Cai Lun led to this good's replacement as a primary writing surface in the 2nd century. For the point, name this fast-growing plant, the primary food source of the panda.
Answer: Bamboo (

4937. Anne Curry wrote a "New History" of this battle, which was the subject of a mock 2010 tribunal in which justices such as Ruth Bader Ginsburg found its victor guilty of war crimes. The weight of mud on armor, as well as a system of stakes, disadvantaged one side in this battle. Charles d’Albret [[sharl dahl-BREH]] was killed in this battle, which saw the mass death of French knights under fire from English longbowmen. For the point, identify this decisive 1415 victory for Henry V of England.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt [[ah-zheen-KOHR]] (

4938. Polymath Abbas ibn Firnas may have been the first man to accomplish this feat using foreign silk. By performing this feat, the emperor's son Yuan Huangtou [[HWAHNG-TOH]] escaped imprisonment in Northern Qi [[CHEE]] territory. Eilmer of Malmesbury's love for the story of Daedalus [[DAY-dah-luss]] prompted him to attempt this feat in 11th-century England, traveling two hundred feet before crashing. For the point, name this feat accomplished by the Wright Brothers in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina in 1903.
Answer: Flight (

4939. The Peace Preservation Law banned one of these parties, which was cracked down on by a group nicknamed the "Thought Police." Douglas MacArthur threatened to use violent force against this party's Sanbetsu arm during late 1940s strikes. A party of this type defeated the various warlord cliques and resisted a Japanese invasion. The People's Republic of China is ruled by, for the point, which general type of party influenced by Marxist ideals?
Answer: Communist Party (or Communists

4940. The only original, typewritten manuscript of this oration was given to a volunteer security guard, Villanova basketball star George Raveling [[RAV-eh-ling]]. This speech references the Emancipation Proclamation, claiming that "One hundred years later, the Negro is still not free." A quarter of a million civil rights supporters were present outside the Lincoln Memorial during, for the point, which 1963 oration by Martin Luther King, Jr.?
Answer: I Have a Dream Speech (or the Speech during the March on Washington

4941. In one war, this nation attempted to invade the Isonzo River Valley twelve times, each time being repelled by Austrian forces. This nation later stopped a Central Powers offensive at Monte Grappa, reversing their severe losses against German forces at Caporetto. After winning at Vittorio Veneto, this country occupied Trieste and the Tyrol. For the point, name this Mediterranean nation, formerly part of the Triple Alliance, that in 1915 joined the Allies during World War One.
Answer: Italy (or Italian Republic; or Repubblica Italiana

4942. Walter Cannon used these animals to support his theory of emotions by removing their sympathetic nervous systems. A French one of these animals named Félicette [[FEH-lee- set]] was the only member of its species sent to space. One of these animals is simultaneously dead and alive in a thought experiment by Erwin Schrödinger [[SHROH-ding-uh]]. For the point, name these scientifically-studied felines that were once worshipped in Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Domestic cats (or House cats

4943. This empire used a system of royal couriers called angoros who were able to cover 1,600 miles in nine days. A postal system developed for this empire involved strategically placed relay stations, and was called Chapar Khaneh. This empire built the East-West "Royal Road," connecting the Anatolian city of Sardis to the Median city of Susa. Governors called satraps were used by, for the point, what empire, which originated in modern Iran?
Answer: First Persian Empire; (

4944. Prosecutor Natalia Poklonskaya [[pohk-lohn-SKY-yah]] attempted to ban this region's Mejlis [[MEHJ-leess]] autonomous assemblies, forcing legislators to flee north. Using cattle trains, Lavrentiy Beria and the NKVD emptied this region of its Tatar minority due to largely false claims they collaborated with the Nazis. In 2014, this autonomous region declared independence for one day until its annexation by the Russian Federation. For the point, name this peninsula, formerly controlled by Ukraine.
Answer: Crimean Peninsula (

4945. In defiance of 2021 Parliamentary elections, supporters of the Fatah Alliance in this country have set-up "protest camps" near its heavily-guarded Green Zone in the Karkh district. During the Injar Offensive, cities in this country like Abu Ghraib [[AH-boo GRAYB]] and Fallujah [[fah-LOO-jah]] were seized by the insurgent Islamic State. In 2003, the United States toppled this country's regime of Saddam Hussein. The Gulf War was started by, for the point, what Mesopotamian country that invaded neighboring Kuwait?
Answer: Republic of Iraq (or Jumhuriyat al-Irāq; or Komar-i Eraq)

4946. Despite significant numerical inferiority, this ruler won the Battle of the Soor thanks to the insubordinate seizure of Burkersdorf by Ferdinand of Brunswick. This man's only serious loss came at Kunersdorf, though he was saved from destruction by Austrian and Russian hesitation, which he dubbed the "Miracle of the House of Brandenburg." With victories at Chotusitz and Mollwitz, this ruler secured the region of Silesia in the War of the Austrian Succession. For the point, name this militaristic King of Prussia nicknamed "the Great."
Answer: Frederick II (

4947. Carlos the Jackal bombed this city's Radio Free Europe headquarters in the late 1980s. Heinrich Himmler ordered the construction of Dachau thirty kilometers outside this city. During an operation called Iqrit and Baram [[ee-KREET and bah-RAHM]], Islamic extremists called Black September kidnapped Jewish athletes and held them hostage during the 1972 Olympics held in this city. For the point, name this Bavarian capital and site of the Beer Hall Putsch, the birthplace of Nazism.
Answer: Munich (or Munchen)

4948. The mass rejection of this movement's early works by the likes of Johan Jongkind and Camille Pissarro [[pee-sah-ROH]] occurred at the "Salon of the Refused" partly due to protests reaching the traditionalist Napoleon III. A painter in this movement depicted Republican France's first instance of the "Celebration of Peace" holiday in the painting The Rue Mosnier [[ROO-mohs-NYEH]] Dressed with Flags. The nude painting Olympia by Édouard Manet is an example of, for the point, what art movement whose other members include Claude Monet?
Answer: Impressionism (

4949. Evoking Roman history, one politician wrote that these battles were a sign that, "the Die was cast, the Rubicon crossed," in his diary shortly before fleeing his Braintree home. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote that the "Shot heard round the world" occurred at the beginning of these battles. Paul Revere's ride occurred immediately prior to, for the point, what set of 1775 skirmishes in Massachusetts which began the Revolutionary War?
Answer: Battles of Lexington and Concord (

4950. Mass eviction of tenants during this event led to retaliations such as the shooting of Major Denis Mahon [[MAHN]]. "Souperism" was a movement during this event to convert starving families to Protestantism by providing them with food. This disaster was worsened by the policies of Prime Minister John Russell, which continued to export grain away from an affected island. For the point, name this 19th-century blight of a crop, which led to an Irish diaspora.
Answer: Great Famine (

4951. This ruler’s forces used smoke bombs to entrap two princes named Mstislav [[meet- EE-slahv]] at the Battle of the Kalka River. This ruler became bitter rivals with his childhood friend, Jamukha, after their campaign against the Merkits. This man founded an empire that conquered the largest contiguous land area in history. Succeeded by his son Ogedei [[OH-geh- day]] and his grandson Kublai, for the point, who was this founder of the Mongol empire?
Answer: Genghis Khan (or Chengis Khan; or Temüjin)

4952. In 1993, this sport was marred by tragedy when Monica Seles [[SEH-less]] was stabbed during a changeover. The original "Battle of the Sexes" in this sport saw Billie Jean King defeat Bobby Riggs in straight sets in 1973, but Jimmy Connors defeated Martina Navratilova in 1992. In 2021, controversy erupted when Peng Shuai [[PAHNG-SHWY]], a star in this sport, mysteriously disappeared after returning to China. For the point, name this sport whose oldest Grand Slam event is Wimbledon.
Answer: Tennis

4953. A trial concerning this organization and Steve Jackson Games resulted after this agency seized hundreds of floppy drives and private data concerning a joke server titled "Illuminati." A member of this agency named Tim McCarthy was wounded by John Hinckley, Jr. during his assassination attempt of Ronald Reagan. For the point, name this agency under the Department of Homeland Security which protects political leaders of the U.S. including current and former presidents.
Answer: United

4954. In Geoffrey Chaucer’s “Pardoner’s Tale,” he criticizes greedy men and doctors during this period. Another work of Chaucer's, The Book of the Duchess, mourns the death of Blanche of Castile, Henry IV’s mother, during this time period. La Danse Macabre, or “the Dance of Death” was a genre that originated during this historical period. The frame story of Boccaccio's Decameron is about ten people who flee Florence during, for the point, what pandemic that wiped out a third of Europe's population?
Answer: Black Death (or Bubonic Plague

4955. During this man's tenure as president of Princeton University, playwright Eugene O'Neill was expelled for throwing a rock at his window. Under this man's administration, the Palmer Raids were launched to arrest radical leftists. This man's ran for re-election by insisting that "He Kept Us Out of War," though he ironically declared war on Germany four months into his second term. For the point, name this 28th president of the United States who served during World War One.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

4956. The Germanic Heruli tribe sacked this city, looting its Stoa Poikile [[stoh-AH poh-ee- KEE-leh]] and defacing art depicting the semi-legendary Battle of Oenoe [[ee-NOH-nee]]. The Sacred Way connected this city's district of Keremeikos to nearby Eleusis [[eh-LOO-siss]], where the Eleusinian [[eh-loo-SIH-nee-an]] Mysteries occurred. This city rebuilt its "Long Walls" after they were torn down by the victorious Spartans during the Peloponnesian War. The Acropolis contains the Parthenon of, for the point, what Greek city-state?
Answer: Athens (or Athenai)

4957. Eighteen years after the first meeting in this city, a similar assembly was called for in Serdica. After his conversion to Christianity, Constantine summoned Christian bishops for a meeting in this city. Some of the decisions made at that meeting in this city included settling the date on which Easter should be celebrated, early decisions on Biblical canon, and a namesake creed. For the point, name this Bithynian [[bih-THIN-ee-an]] city that hosted two councils for the early Catholic church.
Answer: Nicaea [[nye-SEE-ah]] (be lenient on pronunciation

4958. He's not Tito, but this world leader's "Third Way" foreign policy courted both the U.S. and Soviet Union. Several of this leader's right-wing supporters killed Montoneros in the Ezeiza [[eh-ZEH-zah]] Massacre. This man's wife died of cancer after helping establish "The Children's Republic" theme park near Buenos Aires. The descamisados supported this man and his third wife, President Isabela. For the point, name this Argentine populist and president.
Answer: Juan Perón (or Juan Domingo Perón)

4959. This structure's nickname may derive from a boxer named Caunt or an engineer named Hall. Augustus Pugin [[PYOO-jin]] designed this landmark as part of Charles Barry's rebuilding project following an 1834 fire. A melody that is emitted from this landmark every fifteen minutes is known as the "Westminster Quarters," and the sound of this structure's hourly ringing introduces news on both ITV and the BBC. For the point, give this common name for the Great Bell of the clock tower on London's Palace of Westminster.
Answer: Big Ben (

4960. While president, this reformer published articles anonymously in the Ileri [[ee-LEH- ree]] newspaper to promote nationalism. U.S. education reformer John Dewey was invited by this man to his nation in the mid-1920s, and this man banned the fez through the 1925 Hat Law. The Sheik Said [[SAH-eed]] rebellion, the first major Kurdish revolt, occurred during this man's administration. The Ottoman Empire was formally ended by, for the point, what reformer, the first president of the Republic of Turkey?
Answer: Mustafa Kemal Ataturk (

4961. A member of a cadet branch of this dynasty, Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies, provided asylum for Pope Pius IX [[the Ninth]] after his ousting by the short-lived Roman Republic. The One Hundred Days of Napoleon briefly interrupted a "Restoration" named for this dynasty. The longest reigning monarch in European history, the "Sun King" Louis XIV [[the Fourteenth]] was of this dynasty. The Kingdoms of France and Spain were once controlled by, for the point, what dynasty of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]]?
Answer: House of Bourbon (or Bourbon dynasty; or Bourbons)

4962. A network named for this good is used by economists to describe a "Chinese Commonwealth," closely linking the PRC's business sector with that of Southeast Asia. Lamination of this good was performed by the Japanese to create the yumi bows wielded by feudal-era samurai. The introduction of paper by Cai Lun led to this good's replacement as a primary writing surface in the 2nd century. For the point, name this fast-growing plant, the primary food source of the panda.
Answer: Bamboo (

4963. This statesman briefly served as the initial chairman for the 9/11 Commission. Along with Le Duc Tho, this man won the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts in negotiating a ceasefire in Vietnam. In 1971, this man embarked on a secret trip to meet with Premier Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong, before returning on a public trip the following year. For the point, name this German-born U.S. Secretary of State who served under Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford.
Answer: Henry Kissinger (or Henry Alfred Kissinger; or Heinz Alfred Kissinger)

4964. Anne Curry wrote a "New History" of this battle, which was the subject of a mock 2010 tribunal in which justices such as Ruth Bader Ginsburg found its victor guilty of war crimes. The weight of mud on armor, as well as a system of stakes, disadvantaged one side in this battle. Charles d’Albret [[sharl dahl-BREH]] was killed in this battle, which saw the mass death of French knights under fire from English longbowmen. For the point, identify this decisive 1415 victory for Henry V of England.
Answer: Battle of Agincourt [[ah-zheen-KOHR]] (

4965. Polymath Abbas ibn Firnas may have been the first man to accomplish this feat using foreign silk. By performing this feat, the emperor's son Yuan Huangtou [[HWAHNG-TOH]] escaped imprisonment in Northern Qi [[CHEE]] territory. Eilmer of Malmesbury's love for the story of Daedalus [[DAY-dah-luss]] prompted him to attempt this feat in 11th-century England, traveling two hundred feet before crashing. For the point, name this feat accomplished by the Wright Brothers in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina in 1903.
Answer: Flight (

4966. The Peace Preservation Law banned one of these parties, which was cracked down on by a group nicknamed the "Thought Police." Douglas MacArthur threatened to use violent force against this party's Sanbetsu arm during late 1940s strikes. With assistance from the Kuomintang, a party of this type defeated the various warlord cliques and resisted a Japanese invasion. The People's Republic of China is ruled by, for the point, which general type of party influenced by Marxist ideals?
Answer: Communist Party (or Communists

4967. The only original, typewritten manuscript of this oration was given to a volunteer security guard, Villanova basketball star George Raveling [[RAV-eh-ling]]. This speech references the Emancipation Proclamation, claiming that "One hundred years later, the Negro is still not free." A quarter of a million civil rights supporters were present outside the Lincoln Memorial during, for the point, which 1963 oration by Martin Luther King, Jr.?
Answer: I Have a Dream Speech (or the Speech during the March on Washington

4968. In one war, this nation attempted to invade the Isonzo River Valley twelve times, each time being repelled by Austrian forces. This nation later stopped a Central Powers offensive at Monte Grappa, reversing their severe losses against German forces at Caporetto. After winning at Vittorio Veneto, this country occupied Trieste and the Tyrol. For the point, name this Mediterranean nation, formerly part of the Triple Alliance, that in 1915 joined the Allies during World War One.
Answer: Italy (or Italian Republic; or Repubblica Italiana

4969. Walter Cannon used these animals to support his theory of emotions by removing their sympathetic nervous systems. One of these animals named "CC" was a long-lived genetic clone born in 2001. A French one of these animals named Félicette [[FEH-lee-set]] was the only member of its species sent to space. One of these animals is simultaneously dead and alive in a thought experiment by Erwin Schrödinger [[SHROH-ding-uh]]. For the point, name these scientifically-studied felines that were once worshipped in Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Domestic cats (or House cats

4970. This empire used a system of royal couriers called angoros who were able to cover 1,600 miles in nine days. A postal system developed for this empire involved strategically placed relay stations, and was called Chapar Khaneh. This empire built the East-West "Royal Road," connecting the Anatolian city of Sardis to the Median city of Susa. Governors called satraps were used by, for the point, what empire, which originated in modern Iran?
Answer: First Persian Empire; (

4971. An early version of this script possibly appears in inscriptions on 26 Etruscan helmets found in Negau, though another theory claims this script derives from the Rhaetic alphabet. Elder Futhark used these letters, the longest inscription for which is found on the Rök stone, which features kennings common in skaldic poetry. Both Gothic and Italic origins have been proposed for, for the point, what alphabet once used to write Germanic languages?
Answer: Runes (or Runic alphabet

4972. Prosecutor Natalia Poklonskaya [[pohk-lohn-SKY-yah]] attempted to ban this region's Mejlis [[MEHJ-leess]] autonomous assemblies, forcing legislators to flee north. Using cattle trains, Lavrentiy Beria and the NKVD emptied this region of its Tatar minority due to largely false claims they collaborated with the Nazis. In 2014, this autonomous region declared independence for one day until its annexation by the Russian Federation. For the point, name this peninsula, formerly controlled by Ukraine.
Answer: Crimean Peninsula (

4973. In defiance of 2021 Parliamentary elections, supporters of the Fatah Alliance in this country have set-up "protest camps" near its heavily-guarded Green Zone in the Karkh district. During the Injar Offensive, cities in this country like Abu Ghraib [[AH-boo GRAYB]] and Fallujah [[fah-LOO-jah]] were seized by the insurgent Islamic State. In 2003, the United States toppled this country's regime of Saddam Hussein. The Gulf War was started by, for the point, what Mesopotamian country that invaded neighboring Kuwait?
Answer: Republic of Iraq (or Jumhuriyat al-Irāq; or Komar-i Eraq)

4974. Confederate sympathizers from this nation led by Vernon Locke captured and commandeered a Union steamer in the Chesapeake Affair. Rebels from this nation led by William Lyon Mackenzie crossed into U.S. waters while aboard the Caroline, which was later burned by British forces. The death of Richard Montgomery occurred during an invasion of this nation, leading Benedict Arnold to head an ineffectual siege of Quebec City. For the point, name this northern neighbor of the United States.
Answer: Canada (

4975. This party claimed to adhere to "New Nationalism" and a "Square Deal," becoming the only third party to finish ahead of the Republicans when that party nominated William H. Taft. In that election, this party's presidential candidate continued a campaign speech after being shot. This party earned its popular name after that candidate declared he was "strong as a" certain animal. For the point, name this party that nominated Theodore Roosevelt for U.S. president in 1912.
Answer: Progressive Party (or Progressives

4976. Despite significant numerical inferiority, this ruler won the Battle of the Soor thanks to the insubordinate seizure of Burkersdorf by Ferdinand of Brunswick. This man's only serious loss came at Kunersdorf, though he was saved from destruction by Austrian and Russian hesitation, which he dubbed the "Miracle of the House of Brandenburg." With victories at Chotusitz and Mollwitz, this ruler secured the region of Silesia in the War of the Austrian Succession. For the point, name this militaristic King of Prussia nicknamed "the Great."
Answer: Frederick II (

4977. Carlos the Jackal bombed this city's Radio Free Europe headquarters in the late 1980s. Heinrich Himmler ordered the construction of Dachau thirty kilometers outside this city. During an operation called Iqrit and Baram [[ee-KREET and bah-RAHM]], Islamic extremists called Black September kidnapped Jewish athletes and held them hostage during the 1972 Olympics held in this city. For the point, name this Bavarian capital and site of the Beer Hall Putsch, the birthplace of Nazism.
Answer: Munich (or Munchen)

4978. The mass rejection of this movement's early works by the likes of Johan Jongkind and Camille Pissarro [[pee-sah-ROH]] occurred at the "Salon of the Refused" partly due to protests reaching the traditionalist Napoleon III. A painter in this movement depicted Republican France's first instance of the "Celebration of Peace" holiday in the painting The Rue Mosnier [[ROO-mohs-NYEH]] Dressed with Flags. The nude painting Olympia by Édouard Manet is an example of, for the point, what art movement whose other members include Claude Monet?
Answer: Impressionism (

4979. Evoking Roman history, one politician wrote that these battles were a sign that, "the Die was cast, the Rubicon crossed," in his diary shortly before fleeing his Braintree home. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote that the "Shot heard round the world" occurred at the beginning of these battles. Paul Revere's ride occurred immediately prior to, for the point, what set of 1775 skirmishes in Massachusetts which began the Revolutionary War?
Answer: Battles of Lexington and Concord (

4980. Mass eviction of tenants during this event led to retaliations such as the shooting of Major Denis Mahon [[MAHN]]. "Souperism" was a movement during this event to convert starving families to Protestantism by providing them with food. This disaster was worsened by the policies of Prime Minister John Russell, which continued to export grain away from an affected island. For the point, name this 19th-century blight of a crop, which led to an Irish diaspora.
Answer: Great Famine (

4981. This ruler’s forces used smoke bombs to entrap two princes named Mstislav [[meet- EE-slahv]] at the Battle of the Kalka River. This ruler became bitter rivals with his childhood friend, Jamukha, after their campaign against the Merkits. This ruler sent his lieutenant, Subutai to destroy the Khwarezmian Empire, and this man founded an empire that conquered the largest contiguous land area in history. Succeeded by his son Ogedei [[OH-geh-day]] and his grandson Kublai, for the point, who was this founder of the Mongol empire?
Answer: Genghis Khan (or Chengis Khan; or Temüjin)

4982. In 1993, this sport was marred by tragedy when Monica Seles [[SEH-less]] was stabbed during a changeover. The original "Battle of the Sexes" in this sport saw Billie Jean King defeat Bobby Riggs in straight sets in 1973, but Jimmy Connors defeated Martina Navratilova in 1992. In 2021, controversy erupted when Peng Shuai [[PAHNG-SHWY]], a star in this sport, mysteriously disappeared after returning to China. For the point, name this sport whose oldest Grand Slam event is Wimbledon.
Answer: Tennis

4983. A trial concerning this organization and Steve Jackson Games resulted after this agency seized hundreds of floppy drives and private data concerning a joke server titled "Illuminati." A member of this agency named Tim McCarthy was wounded by John Hinckley, Jr. during his assassination attempt of Ronald Reagan. For the point, name this agency under the Department of Homeland Security which protects political leaders of the U.S. including current and former presidents.
Answer: United

4984. In Geoffrey Chaucer’s “Pardoner’s Tale,” he criticizes greedy men and doctors during this period. Another work of Chaucer's, The Book of the Duchess, mourns the death of Blanche of Castile, Henry IV’s mother, during this time period. La Danse Macabre, or “the Dance of Death” was a genre that originated during this historical period. The frame story of Boccaccio's Decameron is about ten people who flee Florence during, for the point, what pandemic that wiped out a third of Europe's population?
Answer: Black Death (or Bubonic Plague

4985. This man won the 1904 Nobel Prize in Physiology after publishing The Work of the Digestive Glands and earned his PhD after presenting research on what he termed "nervism." Although he also used stimuli like shocks, this man's best known experiment involved ringing a bell to indicate that food was ready for a group of dogs. For the point, name this Russian scientist known for developing the idea of classical conditioning.
Answer: Ivan Pavlov (or Ivan Petrovich Pavlov)

4986. During this man's tenure as president of Princeton University, playwright Eugene O'Neill was expelled for throwing a rock at his window. Under this man's administration, the Palmer Raids were launched to arrest radical leftists. This man's ran for re-election by insisting that "He Kept Us Out of War," though he ironically declared war on Germany four months into his second term. For the point, name this 28th president of the United States who served during World War One.
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

4987. In this city, George Turner Marsh imported koi fish for a garden at the 1894 World’s Fair. Many of those immigrants passed through Angel Island en route to this city, which experienced an influx of Japanese migrants after a catastrophic 1906 earthquake. For the point, name this northern California city on a namesake bay.
Answer: San Francisco

4988. This location’s current structure was designed by two Greek geometers, Isidore of Miletus [[my-LEE-tuss]] and Anthemius [[an-THEE-mee-us]] of Tralles [[TRAH-less]]. Following the Nika Revolt, Justinian I ordered this location to be rebuilt a third time to become, at the time, the largest church in Eastern Orthodoxy. Built in the imperial capital of the Byzantine Empire, for the point, what is this place of worship which was converted into a mosque following the fall of Constantinople?
Answer: Hagia Sophia [["EYE"-ah soh-FEE-ah]] (or Holy Hagia Sophia Grand Mosque

4989. This dynasty introduced the Jiedushi [[GEE-DOO-SHE]], a commander-turned- military governor, whose ranks included the rebellious An Lushan. This dynasty's future emperors Taizong and his father Gaozu [[GOW-ZOO]] overthrew the short-lived Sui [[SWEH]] Dynasty. For the point, name this medieval dynasty that included the only female independent ruler of China, Empress Wu.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (or Tángcháo

4990. Alongside astrology, this field was covered in the most popular work attributed to the legendary figure Hermes Trismegistus [[TRIS-meh-GIS-tus]]. Common aims of this practice included the development of panaceas to cure all diseases as well as chrysopoeia [[kry-soh- PEE-uh]], or the transformation of base metals into gold. The Philosopher's Stone was a goal of, for the point, what proto-scientific field which was practiced in the medieval Western and Islamic worlds?
Answer: Alchemy (or Alchemists

4991. On this island, the Kempeitai [[kem-PAY-tie]] orchestrated the Sandakan Death Marches of Australian and British POWs. On this island, the occupying Japanese publicly executed Syarif Muhammad Alkadrie [[al-KAH-dree]] and the royal family to discredit the Pontianak [[PON-tee-ah-nahk]] Sultanate. During the Konfrontasi [[kon-fron-TAH-see]], the majority of fighting occurred on this island, which is known as Kalimantan to the Indonesians. Brunei and a part of Malaysia are on, for the point, what Southeast Asian island, the third largest on Earth?
Answer: Borneo (

4992. Many of the scientists involved with making these objects were relocated after World War Two to the Redstone Arsenal in Alabama. One of these objects crossed the Kármán line to become the first man-made object to enter space. These weapons were developed at Peenemünde [[PEH-nuh-MYOON-duh]] by a team led by Werner von Braun [[VER-nuh fahn BRAWN]]. For the point, name these rocket weapons developed by the Nazi military to terrorize Allied civilians.
Answer: V-2 Rockets (or Vergeltungswaffe Zwei

4993. Following this war, Krzysztof Penderecki [[kuh-SHEE-shtoff pen-deh-RETS-kyee]] wrote a piece to commemorate the destruction of one city during it. Aaron Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" was written to symbolize one nation's entry into this war. During this war, Dmitri Shostakovich [[shoh-stah-KOH-vitch]] wrote his "Leningrad" Symphony in response to a German invasion. For the point, name this 20th-century war during which the short-short-short-long motif of Beethoven's 5th Symphony was used to celebrate "V-E" Day.
Answer: World War Two (

4994. Over two thousand years prior to the British disaster, this man led a successful military campaign against barbarians located on the Gallipoli [[gah-LEE-poh-lee]] Peninsula. This man's father had been ostracized, but this man was able to get Thucydides [[thoo-SIH- do-deez]] ostracized thanks to his own political connections. Like his sons and sister, this man died from a plague that was rampaging in his city during the Peloponnesian War. For the point, name this statesman and orator during the Golden Age of Athens.
Answer: Pericles [[peh-RIH-kleez]]

4995. A poem by this author was criticized in the anti-imperialist satirical essay "To the Person Sitting in Darkness" by Mark Twain. The "Great Game" between British Empire and Russia sets the backdrop for this author's novel Kim. The annexation of the Philippines is encouraged by this British author in his essay "The White Man's Burden." For the point, name this interventionist British author of The Jungle Book.
Answer: Rudyard Kipling (or Joseph Rudyard Kipling)

4996. In this nation, former Spartakiad [[spar-tah-KEE-ahd]] trainer Klement Gottwald [[GOHT-vahlt]] overthrew the democratically elected Edvard Beneš [[BEH-nesh]] in a 1948 coup. To curb Hungarian expansion, this nation formed the Little Entente [[ahn-TAHNT]] with Romania and Yugoslavia. Following the Munich Conference, this nation was forced to cede the Sudetenland [[soo-DEH-ten-land]] to Nazi Germany. Leonid Brezhnev [[BREZH-nef]] sent in the Soviet military to crush, for the point, what nation during the Prague Spring?
Answer: Czechoslovakia (

4997. Chancellor of the Exchequer [[ex-CHEH-ker]] Charles Townsend employed this man to tutor his son following this professor's popular Glasgow lectures. A description of the "invisible hand" was first described in this man's Theory of Moral Sentiments and later used by economists to promote Laissez-Faire [[leh-seh-FEHR]] policies. For the point, name this economist who wrote The Wealth of Nations.
Answer: Adam Smith

4998. Used exclusively during this ritual, the Mahmal [[mahk-MAHL]] is a camel carriage kept empty for ceremonial purposes. Advice on how to undertake this ritual was given by Mughal court official Safi ibn Vali. The Ayyubid sultan Saladin ended the taxation imposed for performing this task by local Hejazi [[heh-JAH-zee]] magistrates. Mansa Musa devalued gold in Egypt while undertaking, for the point, what mandatory journey in which a Muslim travels to Mecca?
Answer: Hajj (

4999. This man constructed a new capital named for himself on top of the old city of Avaris. The Temple of Beit el-Wali was devoted to this ruler after his forces re-asserted control of Nubia. This ruler's charioteers battled Muwatalli II and the Hittites at one ancient battle. This ruler conquered Canaan and Syria, despite being forced to sue for peace after Kadesh [[KAY- desh]]. For the point, name this "great" Egyptian pharaoh, son of Seti [[SEH-tee]].
Answer: Ramses II (or Ramses the Great

5000. Bitter Fruit, a novel written in this nation, details the racial tensions that this country experienced in the 1980s and 90s. Some of this nation's literature is written in Afrikaans, and Long Walk to Freedom was about the fight to end institutionalized segregation in this country. For the point, name this country which is home to authors including Alan Paton [[PAT-un]] and Nelson Mandela.
Answer: Republic of South Africa (or RSA)

5001. With Offa of Mercia [[MEHR-see-ah]], this man abandoned the Roman sou gold coin for a silver-based currency and established the livre as a standard. The use of lowercase letters in Western Europe became standardized by Alcuin [[AL-kwin]] of York while in this man’s court. This son of Pepin the Short was declared Holy Roman Emperor in an 800 C.E. coronation by Pope Leo III. For the point, name this "Great" Carolingian king of the Franks.
Answer: Charlemagne (

5002. A stela at Karnak suggests that this ruler could be personally appealed to for forgiveness from sins. During his relatively brief reign, this monarch moved the capital back to Thebes, ending the Amarna period established by his father. Lord Carnarvon funded an excavation into this ruler's tomb, which was opened in 1922 by Howard Carter. For the point, name this "boy pharaoh" of the Egyptian New Kingdom.
Answer: Tutankhamun or King Tut

5003. Following the Srebrenica [[sreh-breh-NEET-sah]] genocide, this group conducted a two-week bombing campaign, Operation Deliberate Force, and deployed an UN-mandated peacekeeping force called IFOR [[EYE-FOR]]. This group invoked Article 5 of its charter after the September 11th attacks and conducted eight operations. Formed after a namesake treaty was signed on April 4, 1949, for the point, what is this intergovernmental alliance of thirty countries headquartered near Mons, Belgium?
Answer: North Atlantic Treaty Organization (or NATO; or Organisation du traité de l'Atlantique nord; or OTAN

5004. This man was inspired by the work of Francois Marius Granet [grah-NEH] to create the painting The House of Representatives in 1821. This Nativist quoted the Book of Numbers by saying, “What hath God wrought?” while telecommunicating to Baltimore from Washington, D.C. This man’s namesake code represents the Latin alphabet through dots and dashes. For the point, name this American inventor of the single-wire telegraph.
Answer: Samuel Morse (or Samuel Finley Breese Morse)

5005. This country was the site of the MacDonald House bombing. This country’s first leader was advised by the Dutch economist Albert Winsemius [[win-SEH-mee-us]], and this country's 1964 race riots are remembered on Racial Harmony Day. This country's People’s Action Party implemented the death penalty for drug offenses and outlawed chewing gum. For the point, name this country which was led by Lee Kuan Yew, a city-state at the tip of the Malay Peninsula.
Answer: Republic of Singapore (

5006. When this vessel was completed in 1907, it was briefly the largest ship in the world, though that title was taken three months later by the R.M.S. Mauretania, this vessel's sister ship. This ship’s career ended abruptly off the coast of Ireland when U-20 sent a single torpedo into the ship’s starboard side. For the point, name this ocean liner that a German U- Boat torpedoed and sunk in May 1915, contributing to the United States' entry into World War One.
Answer: RMS Lusitania

5007. A conference codenamed Sextant in this city included the Allied offer to Chiang Kai- Shek of full control of French Indochina at war's end, which he declined. The Abdeen Palace incident of 1942 in this city led to the forced resignation of King Farouk I. This city's Tahrir Square was the site of anti-Mubarak demonstrations during the larger "Arab Spring" movement. For the point, name this metropolis along the Nile Delta, the capital of Egypt.
Answer: Cairo (

5008. This ruler had his half-brother, Odo, arrested for unknown reasons and built the Battle Abbey to honor the fallen of a historically significant victory. This king came to power by winning a three-sided succession war against the Norwegian Harald Hardrada [[har- DRAH-dah]] and the Anglo-Saxon Harold Godwinson, a conflict which culminated in the Battle of Hastings. For the point, name this first Norman king of England.
Answer: William the Conqueror (or William I

5009. The historical court scholar Kanke [[KAHN-keh]], who was exiled to this country's Chikuzen [[chih-KOO-zen]] Province in the 9th century, is worshipped in this nation as the primary deity of scholarship known as Tenjin. In this nation's myth, the three-eyed crow known as yata-garasu [[YAH-tah-geh-RAH-soo]] led its mythological Emperor Jimmu to Yamato. Historical figures such as Odu Nobunaga and Emperor Meiji have been worshipped as kami [[KAH-mee]] in, for the point, which East Asian nation?
Answer: Japan (or Nippon-koku; or Nihon-koku)

5010. This man's legacy includes lending his name to a spacecraft launched to map the surface of Venus as well as to two dwarf galaxies. After upsetting royals in his native country, this explorer was sent to serve in Morocco. Before being able to finish his final voyage, this explorer was killed in the modern-day Philippines in 1521. For the point, name this Portuguese explorer whose Spanish fleet was the first to circumnavigate the globe.
Answer: Ferdinand Magellan (or Fernão de Magalhães; or Fernando de Magallanes)

5011. This nation suffered a widespread blindness epidemic in the 1990s caused by gualfarina [[gwahl-fah-REE-nah]] moonshine. This nation sent convicts and political undesirables to the U.S. during the Mariel [[mah-ree-EL]] Boatlift. The Obama administration facilitated a namesake "thaw" in the 2010s which normalized relations with this nation. For the point, name this Caribbean nation ruled by the Castro regime for six decades.
Answer: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)

5012. This location’s construction was initially proposed by James Madison in 1783, but it was not built until John Adams appropriated $5,000 for it. Since then, this location has been expanded numerous times by Ainsworth Rand Spofford, and under the leadership of Herbert Putnam this institution became the first in the United States to house over one million books. For the point, name this oldest federal cultural institution in the United States.
Answer: Library of Congress (

5013. In this city, George Turner Marsh imported koi fish for a garden at the 1894 World’s Fair. The overturning of measures to segregate schools in this city paved the way for the Gentlemen’s Agreement, which reduced immigration from a Pacific nation. Many of those immigrants passed through Angel Island en route to this city, which experienced an influx of Japanese migrants after a catastrophic 1906 earthquake. For the point, name this northern California city on a namesake bay.
Answer: San Francisco

5014. This location’s current structure was designed by two Greek geometers, Isidore of Miletus [[my-LEE-tuss]] and Anthemius [[an-THEE-mee-us]] of Tralles [[TRAH-less]]. Following the Nika Revolt, Justinian I ordered this location to be rebuilt a third time to become, at the time, the largest church in Eastern Orthodoxy. Built in the imperial capital of the Byzantine Empire, for the point, what is this place of worship which was converted into a mosque following the fall of Constantinople?
Answer: Hagia Sophia [["EYE"-ah soh-FEE-ah]] (or Holy Hagia Sophia Grand Mosque

5015. The oligarchic "Family Compact" dominated the politics of this province until the anti- British Rebellions of 1837. Due to illegally shelving a cap-and-trade program in this province, the government of Doug Ford was forced to accept a mandated carbon tax. That man's brother, Rob Ford, was the mayor of a city in this province, facing a 2013 substance abuse scandal before being hospitalized. The 1813 Battle of York saw the raiding of the city of Toronto in, for the point, what most populous province of Canada?
Answer: Ontario (

5016. First borrowed from the Western Wei, this dynasty used the fubing system of militia recruitment to pacify countryside revolts. This dynasty introduced the Jiedushi [[GEE-DOO- SHE]], a commander-turned-military governor, whose ranks included the rebellious An Lushan. This dynasty's future emperors Taizong and his father Gaozu [[GOW-ZOO]] overthrew the short-lived Sui [[SWEH]] Dynasty. For the point, name this medieval dynasty that included the only female independent ruler of China, Empress Wu.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (or Tángcháo

5017. Alongside astrology, this field was covered in the most popular work attributed to the legendary figure Hermes Trismegistus [[TRIS-meh-GIS-tus]]. Common aims of this practice included the development of panaceas to cure all diseases as well as chrysopoeia [[kry-soh- PEE-uh]], or the transformation of base metals into gold. The Philosopher's Stone was a goal of, for the point, what proto-scientific field which was practiced in the medieval Western and Islamic worlds?
Answer: Alchemy (or Alchemists

5018. On this island, the Kempeitai [[kem-PAY-tie]] orchestrated the Sandakan Death Marches of Australian and British POWs. On this island, the occupying Japanese publicly executed Syarif Muhammad Alkadrie [[al-KAH-dree]] and the royal family to discredit the Pontianak [[PON-tee-ah-nahk]] Sultanate. During the Konfrontasi [[kon-fron-TAH-see]], the majority of fighting occurred on this island, which is known as Kalimantan to the Indonesians. Brunei and a part of Malaysia are on, for the point, what Southeast Asian island, the third largest on Earth?
Answer: Borneo (

5019. Many of the scientists involved with making these objects were relocated after World War Two to the Redstone Arsenal in Alabama. One of these objects crossed the Kármán line to become the first man-made object to enter space. These weapons were developed at Peenemünde [[PEH-nuh-MYOON-duh]] by a team led by Werner von Braun [[VER-nuh fahn BRAWN]]. For the point, name these rocket weapons developed by the Nazi military to terrorize Allied civilians.
Answer: V-2 Rockets (or Vergeltungswaffe Zwei

5020. Following this war, Krzysztof Penderecki [[kuh-SHEE-shtoff pen-deh-RETS-kyee]] wrote a piece to commemorate the destruction of one city during it. Aaron Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" was written to symbolize one nation's entry into this war. During this war, Dmitri Shostakovich [[shoh-stah-KOH-vitch]] wrote his "Leningrad" Symphony in response to a German invasion. For the point, name this 20th-century war during which the short-short-short-long motif of Beethoven's 5th Symphony was used to celebrate "V-E" Day.
Answer: World War Two (

5021. Over two thousand years prior to the British disaster, this man led a successful military campaign against barbarians located on the Gallipoli [[gah-LEE-poh-lee]] Peninsula. This man's father had been ostracized, but this man was able to get Thucydides [[thoo-SIH- do-deez]] ostracized thanks to his own political connections. Like his sons and sister, this man died from a plague that was rampaging in his city during the Peloponnesian War. For the point, name this statesman and orator during the Golden Age of Athens.
Answer: Pericles [[peh-RIH-kleez]]

5022. A poem by this author was criticized in the anti-imperialist satirical essay "To the Person Sitting in Darkness" by Mark Twain. The "Great Game" between British Empire and Russia sets the backdrop for this author's novel Kim. The annexation of the Philippines is encouraged by this British author in his essay "The White Man's Burden." For the point, name this interventionist British author of The Jungle Book.
Answer: Rudyard Kipling (or Joseph Rudyard Kipling)

5023. In this nation, former Spartakiad [[spar-tah-KEE-ahd]] trainer Klement Gottwald [[GOHT-vahlt]] overthrew the democratically elected Edvard Beneš [[BEH-nesh]] in a 1948 coup. To curb Hungarian expansion, this nation formed the Little Entente [[ahn-TAHNT]] with Romania and Yugoslavia. Following the Munich Conference, this nation was forced to cede the Sudetenland [[soo-DEH-ten-land]] to Nazi Germany. Leonid Brezhnev [[BREZH-nef]] sent in the Soviet military to crush, for the point, what nation during the Prague Spring?
Answer: Czechoslovakia (

5024. Philosopher James Otteson wrote [this man's] Marketplace of Life, explaining the cohesion between two 18th century works by this thinker. Chancellor of the Exchequer [[ex- CHEH-ker]] Charles Townsend employed this man to tutor his son following this professor's popular Glasgow lectures. A description of the "invisible hand" was first described in this man's Theory of Moral Sentiments and later used by economists to promote Laissez-Faire [[leh-seh-FEHR]] policies. For the point, name this economist who wrote The Wealth of Nations.
Answer: Adam Smith

5025. Used exclusively during this ritual, the Mahmal [[mahk-MAHL]] is a camel carriage kept empty for ceremonial purposes. Advice on how to undertake this ritual was given by Mughal court official Safi ibn Vali, who wrote about his arrival to the port of Mocha. The Ayyubid sultan Saladin ended the taxation imposed for performing this task by local Hejazi [[heh-JAH-zee]] magistrates. Mansa Musa devalued gold in Egypt while undertaking, for the point, what mandatory journey in which a Muslim travels to Mecca?
Answer: Hajj (

5026. This man constructed a new capital named for himself on top of the old city of Avaris. The Temple of Beit el-Wali was devoted to this ruler after his forces re-asserted control of Nubia. This ruler's charioteers battled Muwatalli II and the Hittites at one ancient battle. This ruler conquered Canaan and Syria, despite being forced to sue for peace after Kadesh [[KAY- desh]]. For the point, name this "great" Egyptian pharaoh, son of Seti [[SEH-tee]].
Answer: Ramses II (or Ramses the Great

5027. One of these edicts was used to seize private steel production facilities to support the Korean war effort, but that attempt was deemed unconstitutional. The official "first" of these statutes was retroactively assigned to a Lincoln-era memorandum justifying detaining political prisoners. Franklin Delano Roosevelt set a new standard by issuing over 3700 of these directives. For the point, name this type of directive issued directly by the president of the United States.
Answer: Executive Order

5028. Bitter Fruit, a novel written in this nation, details the racial tensions that this country experienced in the 1980s and 90s. Cry the Beloved Country was written by an author from this nation, who was born in the colony of Natal [[nah-TAHL]]. Some of this nation's literature is written in Afrikaans, and Long Walk to Freedom was about the fight to end institutionalized segregation in this country. For the point, name this country which is home to authors including Alan Paton [[PAT-un]] and Nelson Mandela.
Answer: Republic of South Africa (or RSA)

5029. With Offa of Mercia [[MEHR-see-ah]], this man abandoned the Roman sou gold coin for a silver-based currency and established the livre as a standard. The use of lowercase letters in Western Europe became standardized by Alcuin [[AL-kwin]] of York while in this man’s court. This son of Pepin the Short was declared Holy Roman Emperor in an 800 C.E. coronation by Pope Leo III. For the point, name this "Great" Carolingian king of the Franks.
Answer: Charlemagne (

5030. This city was the site of the first recorded workers’ strike in history when Polish artisans refused to work if they couldn’t vote. 350 years after this city’s founding, visitors could see full-sized replicas of three ships, the Susan Constant, Godspeed, and Discovery. Those three ships, under the leadership of Christopher Newport, brought the first colonists to this city. For the point, name this city, the first permanent English settlement in the Americas.
Answer: Jamestown, Virginia

5031. A stela at Karnak suggests that this ruler could be personally appealed to for forgiveness from sins. During his relatively brief reign, this monarch moved the capital back to Thebes, ending the Amarna period established by his father. Lord Carnarvon funded an excavation into this ruler's tomb, which was opened in 1922 by Howard Carter. For the point, name this "boy pharaoh" of the Egyptian New Kingdom.
Answer: Tutankhamun or King Tut

5032. Following the Srebrenica [[sreh-breh-NEET-sah]] genocide, this group conducted a two-week bombing campaign, Operation Deliberate Force, and deployed a UN-mandated peacekeeping force called IFOR [[EYE-FOR]]. This group invoked Article 5 of its charter after the September 11th attacks and conducted eight operations, including Operation Eagle Assist and Operation Active Endeavor. Formed after a namesake treaty was signed on April 4, 1949, for the point, what is this intergovernmental alliance of thirty countries headquartered near Mons, Belgium?
Answer: North Atlantic Treaty Organization (or NATO; or Organisation du traité de l'Atlantique nord; or OTAN

5033. This man was inspired by the work of Francois Marius Granet [grah-NEH] to create the painting The House of Representatives in 1821. This Nativist quoted the Book of Numbers by saying, “What hath God wrought?” while telecommunicating to Baltimore from Washington, D.C. This man’s namesake code represents the Latin alphabet through dots and dashes. For the point, name this American inventor of the single-wire telegraph.
Answer: Samuel Morse (or Samuel Finley Breese Morse)

5034. This country was the site of the MacDonald House bombing. This country’s first leader was advised by the Dutch economist Albert Winsemius [[win-SEH-mee-us]], and this country's 1964 race riots are remembered on Racial Harmony Day. This country's People’s Action Party implemented the death penalty for drug offenses and outlawed chewing gum. For the point, name this country which was led by Lee Kuan Yew, a city-state at the tip of the Malay Peninsula.
Answer: Republic of Singapore (

5035. When this vessel was completed in 1907, it was briefly the largest ship in the world, though that title was taken three months later by the R.M.S. Mauretania, this vessel's sister ship. This ship’s career ended abruptly off the coast of Ireland when U-20 sent a single torpedo into the ship’s starboard side. For the point, name this ocean liner that a German U- Boat torpedoed and sunk in May 1915, contributing to the United States' entry into World War One.
Answer: RMS Lusitania

5036. A conference codenamed Sextant in this city included the Allied offer to Chiang Kai- Shek of full control of French Indochina at war's end, which he declined. The Abdeen Palace incident of 1942 in this city led to the forced resignation of King Farouk I. This city's Tahrir Square was the site of anti-Mubarak demonstrations during the larger "Arab Spring" movement. For the point, name this metropolis along the Nile Delta, the capital of Egypt.
Answer: Cairo (

5037. This ruler had his half-brother, Odo, arrested for unknown reasons and built the Battle Abbey to honor the fallen of a historically significant victory. This ruler crushed the rebellion of Edward the Exile during the Harrying of the North. This king came to power by winning a three-sided succession war against the Norwegian Harald Hardrada [[har-DRAH- dah]] and the Anglo-Saxon Harold Godwinson, a conflict which culminated in the Battle of Hastings. For the point, name this first Norman king of England.
Answer: William the Conqueror (or William I

5038. Secretary of State John Hay characterized this relatively brief conflict as a “splendid little war.” One of the final actions of this conflict was a lopsided U.S. victory in the Battle of Manila Bay, which book-ended the origin of this conflict on the other side of the globe, an explosion in Havana’s harbor that destroyed the U.S.S. Maine. For the point, name this war, during which Theodore Roosevelt and his “Rough Riders” charged up San Juan Hill.
Answer: Spanish-American War

5039. The historical court scholar Kanke [[KAHN-keh]], who was exiled to this country's Chikuzen [[chih-KOO-zen]] Province in the 9th century, is worshipped in this nation as the primary deity of scholarship known as Tenjin. In this nation's myth, the three-eyed crow known as yata-garasu [[YAH-tah-geh-RAH-soo]] led its mythological Emperor Jimmu to Yamato. Historical figures such as Odu Nobunaga and Emperor Meiji have been worshipped as kami [[KAH-mee]] in, for the point, which East Asian nation?
Answer: Japan (or Nippon-koku; or Nihon-koku)

5040. Dr. Pepper, breast implants, and 3-D printing were all invented in this U.S. state. Until World War One, this state recognized its own dialect of German as an official language. One city in the northern part of this state is known as the "Helium Capital of the World." A chain of amusement parks originated in this state and took its name from six different countries controlling it throughout history. Six Flags originated in, for the point, what Lonestar State?
Answer: Texas (

5041. This man's legacy includes lending his name to a spacecraft launched to map the surface of Venus as well as to two dwarf galaxies. After upsetting royals in his native country, this explorer was sent to serve in Morocco. Before being able to finish his final voyage, this explorer was killed in the modern-day Philippines in 1521. For the point, name this Portuguese explorer whose Spanish fleet was the first to circumnavigate the globe.
Answer: Ferdinand Magellan (or Fernão de Magalhães; or Fernando de Magallanes)

5042. This nation suffered a widespread blindness epidemic in the 1990s caused by gualfarina [[gwahl-fah-REE-nah]] moonshine. This nation experienced economic destitution in the 1990s due to a lack of foreign aid from the recently fallen USSR. This nation sent convicts and political undesirables to the U.S. during the Mariel [[mah-ree-EL]] Boatlift. The Obama administration facilitated a namesake "thaw" in the 2010s which normalized relations with this nation. For the point, name this Caribbean nation ruled by the Castro regime for six decades.
Answer: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)

5043. This location’s construction was initially proposed by James Madison in 1783, but it was not built until John Adams appropriated $5,000 for it. Since then, this location has been expanded numerous times by Ainsworth Rand Spofford, and under the leadership of Herbert Putnam this institution became the first in the United States to house over one million books. For the point, name this oldest federal cultural institution in the United States.
Answer: Library of Congress (

5044. This body of water is home to ruins linked with the Tiwanaku [[tee-wah-NAH-koo]] people. Thor Heyerdahl's Ra II [[TWO]] was constructed by the reed craftsmen from Suriki in this lake. The first warship to navigate this lake was the gunboat Colo Colo, sent by Chile to threaten two other countries during the War of the Pacific. For the point, name this "highest navigable lake" in the world, lying between Peru and Bolivia.
Answer: Lake Titicaca (or Lago Titicaca

5045. A scandal named for this project saw French politicians take bribes from engineers, including Gustave [[goo-STAHV]] Eiffel. Walter Reed conducted research into the causes of yellow fever during the construction of this project, which was finished thanks to a rebellion sponsored by Theodore Roosevelt. In 1979, the Carter administration agreed to hand this structure over to its namesake country at a future date. For the point, name this structure that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal (

5046. "Circling over Shannon" became a euphuism for inebriation in Ireland following an incident where this politician's drunkenness led to his failure to meet with Prime Minister Albert Reynolds. This figure put down the Communist August Coup perpetrated by the Gang of Eight, while his economic liberalization led to the rise of the oligarchs like Mikhail Friedman. Vladimir Putin was the handpicked successor of, for the point, which first president of the Russian Federation?
Answer: Boris Yeltsin (or Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin)

5047. This man executed his first wife, Lady Tsukiyama [[soo-kee-YAH-mah]], following her conspiracy to marry her son off to the daughter of a rival warlord. The Okamoto Daihachi [["die"-HAH-chee]] incident led to this man's persecution of his Christian subjects. This former vassal of Oda Nobunaga [[NOH-boo-NAH-gah]] became the last "Great Unifier" of Japan following the Battle of Sekigahara [[SEH-kee-guh-HAH-rah]]. For the point, name this warlord who established a namesake Shogunate in 1603.
Answer: Tokugawa Ieyasu (

5048. A conference on the Brijuni [[bree-YOO-nee]] Islands between John Foster Dulles and this nation's leader kept it from joining the Eastern Bloc. This country's Communists defeated the Chetniks and Ustaše [[oo-STAH-shuh]] during World War Two under that leader, who became a founder of the Non-Aligned Movement. Led for nearly forty years by Josip Broz Tito, for the point, what was this country that ruled over the territory of modern-day nations like Serbia, Croatia, and Slovenia?
Answer: Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (

5049. While in Parliament, this man helped draft the Root and Branch Bill meant to abolish episcopal governance. This politician from Huntingdon served under Thomas Fairfax in one army. This man, who dismissed the Rump Parliament, was one of the signatories of Charles I's death warrant. For the point, name this Lord Protector who dominated English politics following the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell

5050. A monarch of this house known as "Thulaim," or the Host, began a war with a southern neighbor in an effort to bring the Emirate of Asir into its sphere of influence. The Sudairi Seven are a faction within this family who have controlled the crown since the 1980s. The title Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques was taken by a king of this dynasty named Faisal. An Arabian kingdom is named for, for the point, what royal house which is effectively led by Mohammed bin Salman?
Answer: House of Saud (

5051. The Apadana hoard included one of these items with a sea turtle imprinted in it, the Aegina stater. The earliest proto-form of these items were found in a tomb in Anyang and consist of bronze replicas of cowrie shells. Several gold versions of these items depict Darius the Great. For the point, name these round metal objects used by many ancient realms as currency.
Answer: Coins (

5052. Salvador Laurel became vice president of this country in the aftermath of a disputed 1986 election. That election led to the EDSA Revolution in this country, which brought Corazon Aquino [[ah-KEE-noh]] to power. Her husband Ninoy was supposedly killed on the orders of a dictator of this country, whose wife owned 3,000 pairs of shoes. Ferdinand Marcos was the dictator of, for the point, what country, where he ruled from Manila?
Answer: Republic of the Philippines (

5053. Though it's not Sparta, this city's nobility were the Spartoi, or "sown-men," created by this city's mythical founder, Cadmus. Several Argive champions died supporting Polynices [[PAH-lee-NYE-seez]] as the "Seven Against" [this city], though their sons eventually installed Thersander as ruler. Creon was a mythical ruler of, for the point, what Ancient Greek city state that witnessed the tragedy of Oedipus?
Answer: Thebes (

5054. The Count of Vergennes [[VER-jens]] attempted to negotiate an early version of this treaty that would give an "Indian Barrier State" to Spanish control. The final version of this treaty granted fishing rights off the Grand Banks to one party, who sent Henry Laurens and John Jay, among others, as negotiators. Ratified in Annapolis, for the point, what treaty, named after a European city, offered property restitution to Loyalists in order to end the American Revolutionary War?
Answer: Treaty of Paris

5055. A confederacy of sovereign states of this faith were known as the Misls [[MEE-suls]]. The Dal Khalsa army served this faith, which destroyed the Durrani Empire of Afghanistan after capturing Lahore. An empire named for this religion fought two successive wars with the British, leading to its dissolution into four provinces, including Punjab. For the point, name this militaristic Indian religion that was founded by Guru Nanak.
Answer: Sikhism (

5056. This man's childhood mentor Simón Rodríguez introduced him to Enlightenment ideas like liberty and human rights. In 1812, this man issued the Cartagena [[kar-tah-HEH- nah]] Manifesto. At the end of his Admirable Campaign in 1813, this man marched into Caracas [[kah-RAH-kahss]] but later was forced to flee to Jamaica. For the point, name this man who served as president of Gran Colombia from 1819 to 1830 and was known as "The Liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

5057. The Algeciras [[AL-jeh-SEE-rahs]] Conference resolved a diplomatic incident in this country. Abd el-Krim led anti-colonial resistance in this country during the Rif War. A "crisis" in this country polarized relations between France and German in the lead-up to World War One, after which an international zone was created in this country's city of Tangier. For the point, name this North African kingdom across the Strait of Gibraltar from Spain.
Answer: Kingdom of Morocco or al-Mamlakah al-Maghribiyyah

5058. The location of this battle was codenamed by one side as "A-F", although some thought the real target was the Aleutian Islands. "Nagumo's Dilemma" occurred during this battle, in which a commander refused to commit to a risky attack on Task Force 16. The Japanese began this battle as part of the "barrier strategy" in response to Doolittle's Raid on Tokyo. For the point, identify this decisive 1942 battle in which U.S. forces sunk four Japanese carriers at the cost of the USS Yorktown.
Answer: Battle of Midway

5059. The fifth ruler of this name, who was described as the "precursor to the antichrist" by Theophanes [[thee-AH-fah-nees]], created a standing, professional army known as the themata [[theh-MAH-tah]]. The eleventh ruler of this name, known as "Palaiologos" [[pah- lye-oh-LOH-goss]], shed his armor and died battling the Ottoman army of Mehmed [[MEKH- med]] during a 1453 siege. The legalization of Christianity was done by the first Roman emperor with, for the point, which Latin name?
Answer: Constantine (

5060. During this wider conflict, Henry Hotspur helped defeat an uprising in Wales by Owen Glendower, and led several raids into Picardy. This conflict's early phase saw the destruction of one side's fleet at Sluys [[SLOYS]] and the capture of John the Good at Poitiers [[PWAH- tyeh]]. The Battle of Castillon [[kah-steh-YOHN]] allowed one side to seize Gascony, effectively ending this war. For the point, name this lengthy dynastic conflict between England and France.
Answer: The Hundred Years’ War

5061. Some major pieces of legislation passed during this man’s political tenure included the Factories Act and the Holidays with Pay Act. This man failed to prevent the German invasion of Norway, which prompted the Norway Debate in the British House of Commons. Shortly afterward, this man resigned as prime minister but remained as leader of the Conservative Party. For the point, name this politician who was succeeded as Prime Minister by Winston Churchill.
Answer: Neville Chamberlain (or Arthur Neville Chamberlain)

5062. An artwork made from this material known as The Dancing Girl and found in the city of Mohenjo-Daro was known as the "Mona Lisa" of the Indus River Civilization. The Dying Gladiator is a Roman copy of a Greek statue believed to have been originally sculpted from this material. The first freestanding nude of the Renaissance period, Donatello's David, was produced from this metal alloy. For the point, name this material, commonly used in artwork, an alloy of tin and copper.
Answer: Bronze (or Bronze sculpture)

5063. This weapon is known to Mexican drug cartel members as "El Cuerno de Chivo," or the "Goat's Horn," due to the shape of its magazines. One of these weapons appears on the flag of Mozambique, making it the only modern armament to appear on a nation's ensign. For the point, name this popular assault rifle, designed by Mikhail Kalashnikov, used by the Soviet Army for much of the twentieth century.
Answer: AK-47 (or Avtomat Kalashnikova

5064. This leader was opposed by the Pieds-Noirs [[PYEHD NWAHR]] for granting independence to Algeria through the Evian Accords. In 1968, this man fled Paris during student protests, and after a 1940 military defeat, this exiled man delivered the Appeal of 18 June against the Vichy [[VEE-shee]] regime. This man led the Provisional French Government during the Liberation from Nazi rule and founded the Fifth Republic. For the point, name this leader of Free France during World War Two.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

5065. In 1981, Lynn Margulis published a book explaining the endo-symbiotic theory of the origin of these things. In 1855, Rudolf Virchow [[FEER-koh]] showed that new examples of these units are formed from a type of division. These biological entities were discovered in 1665 in cork samples by Robert Hooke using an early compound microscope. For the point, name these long-studied basic structural units of living organisms.
Answer: Cell (

5066. Using the pseudonym "Frank Talk," Steve Biko [[BEE-koh]] wrote articles opposing this policy. A precursor to this policy known as the Native Lands Act created a series of reserves for minorities like the Venda and Xhosa [[KOH-sah]]. Prime Minister D.F. Malan is considered the architect of this policy, and ANC members like Thabo Mbeki [[em-BEH-kee]] and Nelson Mandela opposed this policy. For the point, name this 20th century South African policy of "separateness."
Answer: Apartheid (

5067. While serving as head of the Naval Consulting Board during World War One, this man sought to discover a domestic source of rubber. Another of this man's ventures was the first film studio, "Black Maria," and he produced films like Electrocuting an Elephant and The Great Train Robbery. Often called “the Wizard of Menlo Park,” for the point, who was this prolific inventor with 1,093 patents, including one for the light bulb?
Answer: Thomas Edison (or Thomas Alva Edison)

5068. This country was the only Latin American nation to join the Korean War. In this country, a decade-long civil war between Liberals and Conservatives was known as La Violencia. The Medellin [[meh-deh-YEEN]] Cartel smuggled drugs out of this country in the late twentieth century under the leadership of Pablo Escobar. In 2017, the leftist FARC disarmed after a decades-long insurgency in this country. For the point, name this country, which as its earlier "Gran" iteration, controlled much of northwest South America.
Answer: Republic of Colombia (

5069. A last ditch effort to save the Western Roman Empire led to the Cape Bon Expedition against these people, which was successfully repelled by Genseric's deployments of fire ships. Due to their Arian beliefs, Justinian sent Belisarius to subdue these people. Under the rule of Gelimer, these people were routed at the Battle of Tricamerum, twenty miles from Carthage. The earlier 455 sack of Rome was conducted by, for the point, what Germanic people whose name became synonymous with "looting"?
Answer: Vandals (

5070. This body of water is home to ruins linked with the Tiwanaku [[tee-wah-NAH-koo]] people, who possibly built a massive, now-ruined temple on the Isla de la Luna. Thor Heyerdahl's Ra II [[TWO]] was constructed by the reed craftsmen from Suriki in this lake. The first warship to navigate this lake was the gunboat Colo Colo, sent by Chile to threaten two other countries during the War of the Pacific. For the point, name this "highest navigable lake" in the world, lying between Peru and Bolivia.
Answer: Lake Titicaca (or Lago Titicaca

5071. In the American South, the Ku Klux Klan openly burned this group's album following their frontman's comment that "[this band] was bigger than Jesus." Over thirty percent of the U.S. viewed this rock group's appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show, fueling a namesake "Mania" in America. George Harrison, Ringo Starr, Paul McCartney, and John Lennon made up, for the point, which highly-influential British band of the 1960s?
Answer: The Beatles

5072. A last ditch effort to save the Western Roman Empire led to the Cape Bon Expedition against these people, which was successfully repelled by Genseric's deployments of fire ships. Due to their Arian beliefs, Justinian sent Belisarius to subdue these people. Under the rule of Gelimer, these people were routed at the Battle of Tricamerum, twenty miles from Carthage. The earlier 455 sack of Rome was conducted by, for the point, what Germanic people whose name became synonymous with "looting"?
Answer: Vandals (

5073. A scandal named for this project saw French politicians take bribes from engineers, including Gustave [[goo-STAHV]] Eiffel. Walter Reed conducted research into the causes of yellow fever during the construction of this project, which was finished thanks to a rebellion sponsored by Theodore Roosevelt. In 1979, the Carter administration agreed to hand this structure over to its namesake country at a future date. For the point, name this structure that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Answer: Panama Canal (

5074. "Circling over Shannon" became a euphuism for inebriation in Ireland following an incident where this politician's drunkenness led to his failure to meet with Prime Minister Albert Reynolds. This figure put down the Communist August Coup perpetrated by the Gang of Eight, while his economic liberalization led to the rise of the oligarchs like Mikhail Friedman. Vladimir Putin was the handpicked successor of, for the point, which first president of the Russian Federation?
Answer: Boris Yeltsin (or Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin)

5075. This man executed his first wife, Lady Tsukiyama [[soo-kee-YAH-mah]], following her conspiracy to marry her son off to the daughter of a rival warlord. The Okamoto Daihachi [["die"-HAH-chee]] incident led to this man's persecution of his Christian subjects. This former vassal of Oda Nobunaga [[NOH-boo-NAH-gah]] became the last "Great Unifier" of Japan following the Battle of Sekigahara [[SEH-kee-guh-HAH-rah]]. For the point, name this warlord who established a namesake Shogunate in 1603.
Answer: Tokugawa Ieyasu (

5076. A conference on the Brijuni [[bree-YOO-nee]] Islands between John Foster Dulles and this nation's leader kept it from joining the Eastern Bloc. This country's Communists defeated the Chetniks and Ustaše [[oo-STAH-shuh]] during World War Two under that leader, who became a founder of the Non-Aligned Movement. Led for nearly forty years by Josip Broz Tito, for the point, what was this country that ruled over the territory of modern-day nations like Serbia, Croatia, and Slovenia?
Answer: Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (

5077. When this man learned his future victim would be attending a performance of Still Waters Run Deep, this man and his team, including Lewis Powell and David Herold, hoped to kidnap their targets en route. While hiding in the barn of Richard H. Garrett, this man was shot and killed by Boston Corbett. Shouting "Sic Semper Tyrannus" after committing his most famous deed, for the point, who was this assassin of Abraham Lincoln?
Answer: John Wilkes Booth

5078. While in Parliament, this man helped draft the Root and Branch Bill meant to abolish episcopal governance. This politician from Huntingdon served under Thomas Fairfax in one army, and led the massacre of Irish civilians at Drogheda [[DRAW-hed-duh]]. This man, who dismissed the Rump Parliament, was one of the signatories of Charles I's death warrant. For the point, name this Lord Protector who dominated English politics following the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver Cromwell

5079. A monarch of this house known as "Thulaim," or the Host, began a war with a southern neighbor in an effort to bring the Emirate of Asir into its sphere of influence. The Sudairi Seven are a faction within this family who have controlled the crown since the 1980s. The title Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques was taken by a king of this dynasty named Faisal. An Arabian kingdom is named for, for the point, what royal house which is effectively led by Mohammed bin Salman?
Answer: House of Saud (

5080. A David Belasco play, The Girl of the Golden West inspired one of this man's operas, which sees Dick Johnson and Minnie flee California during the Gold Rush. After receiving a music box from the Boxer Rebellion, this man incorporated real Chinese folk songs into an opera that includes the aria "Nessun Dorma." For the point, name this Italian composer of Turandot who also depicted the American presence in Japan in his opera Madame Butterfly.
Answer: G

5081. The Apadana hoard included one of these items with a sea turtle imprinted in it, the Aegina stater. The earliest proto-form of these items were found in a tomb in Anyang and consist of bronze replicas of cowrie shells. Sacred animals were often printed on these items, which were first cast in their recognizable form in the Kingdom of Lydia. Several gold versions of these items depict Darius the Great. For the point, name these round metal objects used by many ancient realms as currency.
Answer: Coins (

5082. Salvador Laurel became vice president of this country in the aftermath of a disputed 1986 election. That election led to the EDSA Revolution in this country, which brought Corazon Aquino [[ah-KEE-noh]] to power. Her husband Ninoy was supposedly killed on the orders of a dictator of this country, whose wife owned 3,000 pairs of shoes. Ferdinand Marcos was the dictator of, for the point, what country, where he ruled from Manila?
Answer: Republic of the Philippines (

5083. Though it's not Sparta, this city's nobility were the Spartoi, or "sown-men," created by this city's mythical founder, Cadmus. Several Argive champions died supporting Polynices [[PAH-lee-NYE-seez]] as the "Seven Against" [this city], though their sons eventually installed Thersander as ruler. Creon was a mythical ruler of, for the point, what Ancient Greek city state that witnessed the tragedy of Oedipus?
Answer: Thebes (

5084. The Count of Vergennes [[VER-jens]] attempted to negotiate an early version of this treaty that would give an "Indian Barrier State" to Spanish control. The final version of this treaty granted fishing rights off the Grand Banks to one party, who sent Henry Laurens and John Jay, among others, as negotiators. Ratified in Annapolis, for the point, what treaty offered property restitution to Loyalists in order to end the American Revolutionary War?
Answer: Treaty of Paris

5085. A confederacy of sovereign states of this faith were known as the Misls [[MEE-suls]]. The Dal Khalsa army served this faith, which destroyed the Durrani Empire of Afghanistan after capturing Lahore. An empire named for this religion fought two successive wars with the British, leading to its dissolution into four provinces, including Punjab. For the point, name this militaristic Indian religion that was founded by Guru Nanak.
Answer: Sikhism (

5086. This man's childhood mentor Simón Rodríguez introduced him to Enlightenment ideas like liberty and human rights. In 1812, this man issued the Cartagena [[kar-tah-HEH- nah]] Manifesto, detailing why he believed the First Republic had failed. At the end of his Admirable Campaign in 1813, this man marched into Caracas [[kah-RAH-kahss]] but later was forced to flee to Jamaica. For the point, name this man who served as president of Gran Colombia from 1819 to 1830 and was known as "The Liberator."
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

5087. One of these animals named Jack served as the dedicated assistant to a disabled railway signalman in the Cape Province. One of these animals dressed in a French uniform was legendarily hanged by the citizens of Hartlepool after it was the sole survivor of a Napoleonic-era naval battle. A trial named for this animal concerned John Scopes' teaching of evolution in a Tennessee public school. For the point, name these primates split into "Old World" and "New World" varieties, the former lacking a tail.
Answer: Monkey (

5088. The Algeciras [[AL-jeh-SEE-rahs]] Conference resolved a diplomatic incident in this country. Abd el-Krim led anti-colonial resistance in this country during the Rif War. A "crisis" in this country polarized relations between France and German in the lead-up to World War One, after which an international zone was created in this country's city of Tangier. For the point, name this North African kingdom across the Strait of Gibraltar from Spain.
Answer: Kingdom of Morocco or al-Mamlakah al-Maghribiyyah

5089. The location of this battle was codenamed by one side as "A-F", although some thought the real target was the Aleutian Islands. "Nagumo's Dilemma" occurred during this battle, in which a commander refused to commit to a risky attack on Task Force 16. The Japanese began this battle as part of the "barrier strategy" in response to Doolittle's Raid on Tokyo. For the point, identify this decisive 1942 battle in which U.S. forces sunk four Japanese carriers at the cost of the USS Yorktown.
Answer: Battle of Midway

5090. The fifth ruler of this name, who was described as the "precursor to the antichrist" by Theophanes [[thee-AH-fah-nees]], created a standing, professional army known as the themata [[theh-MAH-tah]]. The eleventh ruler of this name, known as "Palaiologos" [[pah- lye-oh-LOH-goss]], shed his armor and died battling the Ottoman army of Mehmed [[MEKH- med]] during a 1453 siege. The legalization of Christianity was done by the first Roman emperor with, for the point, which Latin name?
Answer: Constantine (

5091. During this wider conflict, Henry Hotspur helped defeat an uprising in Wales by Owen Glendower, and led several raids into Picardy. This conflict's early phase saw the destruction of one side's fleet at Sluys [[SLOYS]] and the capture of John the Good at Poitiers [[PWAH- tyeh]]. The Battle of Castillon [[kah-steh-YOHN]] allowed one side to seize Gascony, effectively ending this war. For the point, name this lengthy dynastic conflict between England and France.
Answer: The Hundred Years’ War

5092. Some major pieces of legislation passed during this man’s political tenure included the Factories Act and the Holidays with Pay Act. This man failed to prevent the German invasion of Norway, which prompted the Norway Debate in the British House of Commons. Shortly afterward, this man resigned as prime minister but remained as leader of the Conservative Party. For the point, name this politician who was succeeded as Prime Minister by Winston Churchill.
Answer: Neville Chamberlain (or Arthur Neville Chamberlain)

5093. An artwork made from this material known as The Dancing Girl and found in the city of Mohenjo-Daro was known as the "Mona Lisa" of the Indus River Civilization. The Dying Gladiator is a Roman copy of a Greek statue believed to have been originally sculpted from this material. The first freestanding nude of the Renaissance period, Donatello's David, was produced from this metal alloy. For the point, name this material, commonly used in artwork, an alloy of tin and copper.
Answer: Bronze (or Bronze sculpture)

5094. This weapon is known to Mexican drug cartel members as "El Cuerno de Chivo," or the "Goat's Horn," due to the shape of its magazines. One of these weapons is depicted on the official Coat of Arms of Zimbabwe, forming an "X" shape with a spade. One of these weapons appears on the flag of Mozambique, making it the only modern armament to appear on a nation's ensign. For the point, name this popular assault rifle, designed by Mikhail Kalashnikov, used by the Soviet Army for much of the twentieth century.
Answer: AK-47 (or Avtomat Kalashnikova

5095. This leader was opposed by the Pieds-Noirs [[PYEHD NWAHR]] for granting independence to Algeria through the Evian Accords. In 1968, this man fled Paris during student protests, and after a 1940 military defeat, this exiled man delivered the Appeal of 18 June against the Vichy [[VEE-shee]] regime. This man led the Provisional French Government during the Liberation from Nazi rule and founded the Fifth Republic. For the point, name this leader of Free France during World War Two.
Answer: Charles de Gaulle

5096. In 1981, Lynn Margulis published a book explaining the endo-symbiotic theory of the origin of these things. In 1855, Rudolf Virchow [[FEER-koh]] showed that new examples of these units are formed from a type of division. These biological entities were discovered in 1665 in cork samples by Robert Hooke using an early compound microscope. For the point, name these long-studied basic structural units of living organisms.
Answer: Cell (

5097. Using the pseudonym "Frank Talk," Steve Biko [[BEE-koh]] wrote articles opposing this policy. A precursor to this policy known as the Native Lands Act created a series of reserves for minorities like the Venda and Xhosa [[KOH-sah]]. Prime Minister D.F. Malan is considered the architect of this policy, and ANC members like Thabo Mbeki [[em-BEH-kee]] and Nelson Mandela opposed this policy. For the point, name this 20th century South African policy of "separateness."
Answer: Apartheid (

5098. While serving as head of the Naval Consulting Board during World War One, this man sought to discover a domestic source of rubber. Another of this man's ventures was the first film studio, "Black Maria," and he produced films like Electrocuting an Elephant and The Great Train Robbery. Often called “the Wizard of Menlo Park,” for the point, who was this prolific inventor with 1,093 patents, including one for the light bulb?
Answer: Thomas Edison (or Thomas Alva Edison)

5099. This country was the only Latin American nation to join the Korean War. In this country, a decade-long civil war between Liberals and Conservatives was known as La Violencia. The Medellin [[meh-deh-YEEN]] Cartel smuggled drugs out of this country in the late twentieth century under the leadership of Pablo Escobar. In 2017, the leftist FARC disarmed after a decades-long insurgency in this country. For the point, name this country, which as its earlier "Gran" iteration, controlled much of northwest South America.
Answer: Republic of Colombia (

5100. In November of 2021, Fruit of Islam member Norman Butler was exonerated for the assassination of this man after a 22-month investigation. This Black activist stated "Our forefathers weren't the Pilgrims. We didn't land on Plymouth Rock; the rock was landed on us" in the "Ballot or the Bullet" speech. A hajj to Mecca led this man to change his name to Malik el-Shabazz. For the point, name this black empowerment activist often at odds with Martin Luther King Jr.
Answer: Malcolm X (

5101. The chief religious role of these people was dispelling chaos, or isfet, and maintaining harmony, or ma'at. These people wore the pschent crown, representing the northern and southern portions of their kingdom. One of these people established a monotheistic religion centered on the sun disk, Aten. These rulers were believed to be human incarnations of the gods Osiris and Ra. For ten points, name these kings who ruled Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Pharaoh (

5102. An ultranationalist group named for blue examples of these objects supported Chiang Kai-Shek’s New Life Movement. The Expedition of the Thousand was conducted by the Red [these objects], who followed Giuseppe Garibaldi. A 1922 March on Rome was led by Benito Mussolini and his followers, nicknamed for black [objects of this type]. For ten points, name this article of clothing whose “Brown” types were worn by the SA [[ESS-AY]].
Answer: Shirts [

5103. Edward R. Murrow ran an episode of See It Now that criticized this politician for his interrogation of Annie Lee Moss. This man, who ran for Senate on the slogan "Congress needs a tail-gunner," was chastised by Joseph Welch with the question, “have you no sense of decency?” For ten points, name this Wisconsin senator who claimed to have a list of 205 known communists in the state department, driving the Second Red Scare.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy

5104. A holder of this position became the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit Antarctica in 2016, staying overnight at McMurdo Station. One of these people claimed the U.S. went to Afghanistan to "deal with the folks who attacked us on 9/11. Antony Blinken and John Kerry are recent Democrats to hold this office. For ten points, name this position, the primary foreign minister of the United States.
Answer: Secretary of

5105. Sixth century Byzantine monks established a pilgrimage site for this figure's purported burial site on Mount Nebo. While this figure was tending the sheep of his father- in-law, a bush caught fire without burning and told this man "I am who I am." This Biblical figure caused a series of plagues in one country, and he parted the Red Sea in Exodus 14. For ten points, name this Biblical prophet who delivered the Israelites from Egyptian slavery.
Answer: Moses (

5106. This ruler's armies forced the Truce of Ratisbon, which ceded Luxembourg to his country and concluded the War of the Reunions. This monarch survived the Fronde [["FROND"]] Rebellion in his youth and employed the engineer Vauban [[VOH-BAHN]] to create star forts along his country's frontier. This king ordered his nobles to inhabit the massive Palace at Versailles. For ten points, name this "Sun King" of France, a long-lived absolutist monarch.
Answer: Louis XIV [[the fourteenth[/a] (

5107. Rebellions near Hanguguan led this dynasty's "Gentleman of the Palace," Zhao Gao, to lead a coup to assassinate the emperor. Shang Yang's philosophy of Legalism was the primary ideology of this dynasty, which ended the Warring States period. The first emperor of this dynasty died from an "Elixir of Immortality" and was responsible for the terracotta army in Xi'an. For ten points, name this short-lived dynasty from which the western name for China is derived.
Answer: Qin [[CHIN]] Dynasty (

5108. This city was governed by a constitution known as the Great Rhetra, written by Lycurgus. Children in this city ate "black soup" and were forced into the Agoge [[ah-GOG- geh]] training system from the age of seven. Elected officials known as Ephors governed this city, which was ruled by two kings. Ritual killings of the Helot underclass occurred in, for ten points, what militaristic ancient city state which rivaled Athens?
Answer: Sparta (

5109. Earl Grey tea is named for one holder of this position, while another names the capital of the Australian state of Victoria. A Canadian, Andrew Bonar Law, held this position for 211 days between 1922 and 1923. As a result of the Brexit controversy, Theresa May resigned from this position in July 2019. For ten points, name this position, held since 2019 by Boris Johnson from 10 Downing Street, the head of the British government.
Answer: Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (

5110. Just after this event, a similar event occurred on the urging of Benjamin Rush in Philadelphia. This event's participants attacked the Eleanor, Beaver, and Dartmouth. Conducted by Sons of Liberty dressed as Native Americans, for ten points, what was this destructive act of protest in which a shipment of the namesake product was destroyed in a Massachusetts harbor?
Answer: Boston Tea Party BONUS: Following the Boston Tea Party, this British king quoted Julius Caesar in a letter by saying "The die is now cast." King George III (

5111. Explorer Henri Mouhot [[moo-HOH]] was the first westerner to discover this site while serving as a missionary in Battambang, and he claimed it was a temple which "rivalled Solomon's." This site, a representation of Mount Meru, was built by Suryavarman II [[soor- yah-VAHR-mahn the second]] under the influence of Chola advisors from the Indian subcontinent. The Khmer [[KMARE]] Empire built, for ten points, what palatial complex seen on the modern flag of Cambodia?
Answer: Angkor Wat BONUS: Angkor Wat was damaged during a firefight between Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge and an invading force from this country, which was led by the recently victorious Ho Chi Minh. Vietnam (

5112. This country fought a month-long conflict with Ecuador in 1995 known as the Cenepa War. In this nation, Chilean Bernardo O'Higgins and Argentine general José de San Martín [[mar-TEEN]] crossed the Andes to help liberate this country from Spanish control. For ten points, name this South American country that was once the heartland of the Inca.
Answer: Peru (

5113. This city was the center of the Affair of the Placards, which resulted from rising tensions between Catholics and Protestants. In 1871, over ten thousand people were massacred when a "Commune" in this city was brutally crushed. In November 2015, an ISIS attack at a soccer stadium and the Bataclan Theatre led to over a hundred deaths in this city. For ten points, name this French city where Notre Dame caught fire in 2019.
Answer: Paris (

5114. After failing to provide the donativum to this organization, a rogue member of it slashed the throat of Pertinax. This organization auctioned off the title of imperator, eventually bestowing the title to Didius Julianus for 25,000 sesterces. Earlier that year, this elite unit's prefect paid off Narcissus to kill his wrestling partner, Emperor Commodus. For ten points, name this imperial bodyguard who often interfered in Roman politics.
Answer: Praetorian Guard (

5115. In 2015, in the area surrounding this waterway, an Economic Zone was established with custom rates set at zero as part of a larger "Area Development Project." Operation Musketeer was a planned invasion of this structure by Britain and France, which occurred during a "Crisis" around this structure's nationalization by Gamel Abdel Nasser. For ten points, name this waterway that connects the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
Answer: Suez Canal (or Qanātu as-Suways) BONUS: Israelis commonly refer to the Suez Crisis as a war for this continent-connecting peninsula located in eastern Egypt. Sinai Peninsula (or Sīna)

5116. The dead of these people were buried with maize in their mouth, while this people's Caracol site shows signs of post-mortem bloodletting. The underworld of Xibalba [[shee- BAHL-bah]] is traversed by this people's mythic "Hero Twins" in the compendium, Popul Vuh. For ten points, these myths were carved in the monumental architecture of what Mesoamerican civilization?
Answer: Mayan (

5117. Major 20th-century war during which D-Day took place.
Answer: World War Two (or the Second World War)

5118. Supreme Allied commander and future U.S. president who masterminded the D-day landings.
Answer: Dwight D(avid) Eisenhower

5119. Dictator of the Soviet Union who demanded the Allies start a "Second Front" in Western Europe.
Answer: Joseph Stalin (or Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin)

5120. Region of northern France where the D-Day landings occurred.
Answer: Normandy (or Normandie)

5121. Deadliest beach where nearly 4,000 American soldiers lost their lives.
Answer: Omaha Beach

5122. Nazi field marshal known as the "Desert Fox" who manned the Atlantic Wall fortifications.
Answer: Erwin Rommel (or Johannes Erwin Eugen Rommel)

5123. City-state which fought Rome in the Punic Wars and from which Hannibal hailed.
Answer: Carthage (

5124. Peninsula called Hispania by the Romans, through which Hannibal initially invaded Italy.
Answer: Iberian Peninsula

5125. Large war animals that Hannibal led over the Alps.
Answer: War Elephants

5126. Noble family which included Hannibal's father, Hamilcar, and his younger brothers Hasdrubal and Mago.
Answer: Barcas (

5127. Roman rival of Hannibal who defeated him at the Battle of Zama.
Answer: Scipio Africanus (

5128. Devastating victory in which Hannibal annihilated nearly 50,000 Romans in a double envelopment.
Answer: Battle of Cannae [[CAN-nee]]

5129. Is the largest in the world by discharge volume, and was opened to steamboat travel by Pedro II of Brazil.
Answer: Amazon River (or Rio Amazonas)

5130. Is considered the flowing hair of the god Shiva and was involved in a 1951 water sharing dispute between India and Bangladesh.
Answer: Ganges River (or Ganga

5131. Is a colorfully-named river of China that was strategically flooded by rival nations during the Warring States period.
Answer: Yellow River (or Huáng hé)

5132. Turned black due to the ink from texts once contained in Baghdad's House of Wisdom.
Answer: Tigris River (or Dijlah)

5133. Was explored by Henry Morton Stanley and now names two African countries whose capitals sit across the river from each other.
Answer: Congo River (or Zaire River)

5134. Was the site of a 20th century economic miracle in Seoul, South Korea.
Answer: Han River

5135. Chaturanga was an early version of this game, whose early twentieth century champions included Cuban prodigy José Raúl Capablanca. In 2013, World Champion Vishi Anand was defeated by Norwegian (+) Magnus Carlsen. The 1972 World Championship in this game between Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer (*) was considered a "battle" of the Cold War. For ten points, name this "Game of Kings" which boomed in popularity thanks to the Netflix hit The Queen's Gambit.
Answer: Chess (

5136. While this man was enrolled at West Point, he designed the M1913 Cavalry Saber and competed in the 1912 Summer Olympics. This man controversially organized Task Force (+) Baum to rescue his son-in-law, John K. Waters. This general died shortly after being paralyzed in a low-speed car wreck. Infamously chastised for slapping two shell-shocked (*) soldiers, for ten points, name this successful American general known as "Old Blood and Guts."
Answer: George S(mith) Patton Jr.

5137. The polymath Pindar labelled this body the "Inhospitable Sea" and considered travelling in it to be an ill-omen. A Russian victory on this body of water during the Battle of Sinope [[see-NOH-pee]] led to(+) the British and French entering the Crimean War. The Montreux [[mon-TROO]] Convention allowed foreign vessels to pass to and from, (*) for ten points, what sea which borders countries like Ukraine and Turkey?
Answer: Black Sea (

5138. This man's father formed a short-lived alliance with Murad II until he was imprisoned. This man and his brother Radu were jailed as children, though the Ottomans released him after an invasion of his homeland (+) by John Hunyadi. The envoys of this man's childhood friend, Sultan Mehmed II, were impaled on stakes (*) by this voivode [[VOY-vohd]]. The ruler of independent Wallachia [[woh-LEH-kyuh]] and a Romanian national hero was, for ten points, what infamous warlord who inspired a vampire created by Bram Stoker?
Answer: Vlad the Impaler (or Vlad Tepes [[TEH-pesh]]

5139. After the 1979 overthrow of Jean-Bédel Bokassa [[zhen-BEH-dehl boh-KAH- suh]], this man became the world's only reigning "Emperor." This man was almost deposed in the Kyūjō [[KYOO-joh]] incident, (+) which occurred prior to the "Jewel Voice" broadcast. This son of Taisho, [["TIE"-shoh]] and grandson of Meiji [[MEH-jee]], became the only ruler on the Chrysanthemum (*) Throne to experience a foreign occupation after his country was bombed with nuclear weapons. For ten points, name this Japanese emperor during World War Two.
Answer: Hirohito (

5140. The so-called "English Achilles," John Talbot, led a campaign in this century which ended with the disastrous Battle of Castillon [[cah-steh-YOHN]], leading to the loss of (+) Aquitaine. English longbowmen and the deployment of wooden stakes by the British proved vital at the Battle of Agincourt [[ah-jinn-KOHR]], a clash during this century. The Hundred Years' War (*) ended in, for ten points, what century of the late Middle Ages?
Answer: Fifteenth Century (

5141. The Periplus of the Erythraean [[eh-rith-REH-an]] Sea recounts how Rome traded for this commodity with the Chera Dynasty's merchants on the Malabar Coast. Zheng He's [[ZHEHNG HUHS]] voyage through the Indian (+) Ocean led to this spice transforming from a luxury item to a common household product in Ming China. This spice was colloquially known as "black gold" in the early modern period by Europeans. Salt is (*) historically paired with, for ten points, what spice?
Answer: Black Pepper (

5142. Flights from this nation to Belarus were halted in November 2021 to stop Middle Eastern migrants from entering the EU. A 2016 coup attempt in this nation may have been manufactured by its president to purge the military of enemies. The (+) Kurdish PKK party fought an asymmetrical war with this nation's government, which is led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[EHR-doh-wahn]]. ISIS (*) may have perpetrated the 2015 Ankara Bombings in, for ten points, what Anatolian nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti)

5143. This man signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves, which unintentionally increased the domestic slave trade. In response to British threats to U.S. shipping, this man signed the (+) Embargo Act. In his most famous document, this man wrote that all men have the right to "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of (*) Happiness." For ten points, name this primary author of the Declaration of Independence, the third president of the United States.
Answer: Thomas Jefferson BONUS: FDR claimed December 7th would "live in infamy" after the Japanese surprise attack on this Hawaiian naval base. Pearl Harbor (

5144. The chief religious role of these people was dispelling chaos, or isfet, and maintaining harmony, or ma'at. These people wore the pschent crown, representing the northern and southern portions of their kingdom. One of these people established a monotheistic religion centered on the sun disk, Aten. These rulers were believed to be human incarnations of the gods Osiris and Ra. For ten points, name these kings who ruled Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Pharaoh (

5145. An ultranationalist group named for blue examples of these objects supported Chiang Kai-Shek’s New Life Movement. The Expedition of the Thousand was conducted by the Red [these objects], who followed Giuseppe Garibaldi. A 1922 March on Rome was led by Benito Mussolini and his followers, nicknamed for black [objects of this type]. For ten points, name this article of clothing whose “Brown” types were worn by the SA [[ESS-AY]].
Answer: Shirts [

5146. This man's father formed a short-lived alliance with Murad II until he was imprisoned. This man and his brother Radu were jailed as children, though the Ottomans released him after an invasion of his homeland by John Hunyadi. The envoys of this man's childhood friend, Sultan Mehmed II, were impaled on stakes by this voivode [[VOY-vohd]]. The ruler of independent Wallachia [[woh-LEH-kyuh]] and a Romanian national hero was, for ten points, what infamous warlord who inspired a vampire created by Bram Stoker?
Answer: Vlad the Impaler (or Vlad Tepes [[TEH-pesh]]

5147. This artist depicted a chain of the Order of the Golden Fleece adorning the neck of the title royal in Philip IV in Brown and Silver. One of this man's earlier artistic focuses was on scenes from the kitchen, as shown in his painting An Old Woman Cooking Eggs. One of this man's works shows the ladies-in-waiting of La Infanta Margherita in the court of her father. For ten points, name this Spanish Golden Age artist who created the painting Las Meninas.
Answer: Diego Velázquez (or Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez)

5148. Edward R. Murrow ran an episode of See It Now that criticized this politician for his interrogation of Annie Lee Moss. This man, who ran for Senate on the slogan "Congress needs a tail-gunner," was chastised by Joseph Welch with the question, “have you no sense of decency?” For ten points, name this Wisconsin senator who claimed to have a list of 205 known communists in the state department, driving the Second Red Scare.
Answer: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy

5149. A holder of this position became the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit Antarctica in 2016, staying overnight at McMurdo Station. One of these people claimed the U.S. went to Afghanistan to "deal with the folks who attacked us on 9/11 and we have succeeded in that mission" in response to comparisons of the fall of Kabul with the capture of Saigon. Antony Blinken and John Kerry are recent Democrats to hold this office. For ten points, name this position, the primary foreign minister of the United States.
Answer: Secretary of

5150. Sixth century Byzantine monks established a pilgrimage site for this figure's purported burial site on Mount Nebo. While this figure was tending the sheep of his father- in-law, a bush caught fire without burning and told this man "I am who I am." This Biblical figure caused a series of plagues in one country, and he parted the Red Sea in Exodus 14. For ten points, name this Biblical prophet who delivered the Israelites from Egyptian slavery.
Answer: Moses (

5151. This ruler's armies forced the Truce of Ratisbon, which ceded Luxembourg to his country and concluded the War of the Reunions. This monarch survived the Fronde [["FROND"]] Rebellion in his youth and employed the engineer Vauban [[VOH-BAHN]] to create star forts along his country's frontier. This king ordered his nobles to inhabit the massive Palace at Versailles. For ten points, name this "Sun King" of France, a long-lived absolutist monarch.
Answer: Louis XIV [[the fourteenth[/a] (

5152. Rebellions near Hanguguan led this dynasty's "Gentleman of the Palace," Zhao Gao, to lead a coup to assassinate the emperor. Shang Yang's philosophy of Legalism was the primary ideology of this dynasty, which ended the Warring States period. The first emperor of this dynasty died from an "Elixir of Immortality" and was responsible for the terracotta army in Xi'an. For ten points, name this short-lived dynasty from which the western name for China is derived.
Answer: Qin [[CHIN]] Dynasty (

5153. This city was governed by a constitution known as the Great Rhetra, written by Lycurgus. Children in this city ate "black soup" and were forced into the Agoge [[ah-GOG- geh]] training system from the age of seven. Elected officials known as Ephors governed this city, which was ruled by two kings. Ritual killings of the Helot underclass occurred in, for ten points, what militaristic ancient city state which rivaled Athens?
Answer: Sparta (

5154. Earl Grey tea is named for one holder of this position, while another names the capital of the Australian state of Victoria. A Canadian, Andrew Bonar Law, held this position for 211 days between 1922 and 1923. As a result of the Brexit controversy, Theresa May resigned from this position in July 2019. For ten points, name this position, held since 2019 by Boris Johnson from 10 Downing Street, the head of the British government.
Answer: Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (

5155. Just after this event, a similar event occurred on the urging of Benjamin Rush in Philadelphia. This event's participants attacked the Eleanor, Beaver, and Dartmouth, and it was planned at the Old South Meeting House. Conducted by Sons of Liberty dressed as Native Americans, for ten points, what was this destructive act of protest in which a shipment of the namesake product was destroyed in a Massachusetts harbor?
Answer: Boston Tea Party BONUS: Following the Boston Tea Party, this British king quoted Julius Caesar in a letter by saying "The die is now cast." King George III (

5156. Explorer Henri Mouhot [[moo-HOH]] was the first westerner to discover this site while serving as a missionary in Battambang, and he claimed it was a temple which "rivalled Solomon's." This site, a representation of Mount Meru, was built by Suryavarman II [[soor- yah-VAHR-mahn the second]] under the influence of Chola advisors from the Indian subcontinent. The Khmer [[KMARE]] Empire built, for ten points, what palatial complex seen on the modern flag of Cambodia?
Answer: Angkor Wat BONUS: Angkor Wat was damaged during a firefight between Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge and an invading force from this country, which was led by the recently victorious Ho Chi Minh. Vietnam (

5157. This country fought a month-long conflict with Ecuador in 1995 known as the Cenepa War. Beginning in 1996, the Japanese embassy in this country was the scene of a hostage crisis that lasted for four months. In this nation, Chilean Bernardo O'Higgins and Argentine general José de San Martín [[mar-TEEN]] crossed the Andes to help liberate this country from Spanish control. For ten points, name this South American country that was once the heartland of the Inca.
Answer: Peru (

5158. This city was the center of the Affair of the Placards, which resulted from rising tensions between Catholics and Protestants. In 1871, over ten thousand people were massacred when a "Commune" in this city was brutally crushed. The wildcat strikes of May, 1968 were centered on this city's student population. In November 2015, an ISIS attack at a soccer stadium and the Bataclan Theatre led to over a hundred deaths in this city. For ten points, name this French city where Notre Dame caught fire in 2019.
Answer: Paris (

5159. After failing to provide the donativum to this organization, a rogue member of it slashed the throat of Pertinax. This organization auctioned off the title of imperator, eventually bestowing the title to Didius Julianus for 25,000 sesterces. Earlier that year, this elite unit's prefect paid off Narcissus to kill his wrestling partner, Emperor Commodus. For ten points, name this imperial bodyguard who often interfered in Roman politics.
Answer: Praetorian Guard (

5160. In 2015, in the area surrounding this waterway, an Economic Zone was established with custom rates set at zero as part of a larger "Area Development Project." Operation Musketeer was a planned invasion of this structure by Britain and France, which occurred during a "Crisis" around this structure's nationalization by Gamel Abdel Nasser. For ten points, name this waterway that connects the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
Answer: Suez Canal (or Qanātu as-Suways) BONUS: Israelis commonly refer to the Suez Crisis as a war for this continent-connecting peninsula located in eastern Egypt. Sinai Peninsula (or Sīna)

5161. The dead of these people were buried with maize in their mouth, while this people's Caracol site shows signs of post-mortem bloodletting. Women in this culture travelled to the pilgrimage site of the fertility goddess Ixchel [[EEKS-chehl]] on the isle of Cozumel. The underworld of Xibalba [[shee-BAHL-bah]] is traversed by this people's mythic "Hero Twins" in the compendium, Popul Vuh. For ten points, these myths were carved in the monumental architecture of what Mesoamerican civilization?
Answer: Mayan (

5162. Major 20th-century war during which D-Day took place.
Answer: World War Two (or the Second World War)

5163. Supreme Allied commander and future U.S. president who masterminded the D-day landings.
Answer: Dwight D(avid) Eisenhower

5164. Dictator of the Soviet Union who demanded the Allies start a "Second Front" in Western Europe.
Answer: Joseph Stalin (or Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin)

5165. Region of northern France where the D-Day landings occurred.
Answer: Normandy (or Normandie)

5166. Deadliest beach where nearly 4,000 American soldiers lost their lives.
Answer: Omaha Beach

5167. Nazi field marshal known as the "Desert Fox" who manned the Atlantic Wall fortifications.
Answer: Erwin Rommel (or Johannes Erwin Eugen Rommel)

5168. Westernmost beach the Americans attacked, lying on the Cotentin peninsula.
Answer: Utah Beach

5169. Vegetable nickname given to defensive wooden poles used by the Germans to injure Allied paratroopers and gliders.
Answer: Rommel's Asparagus (

5170. City-state which fought Rome in the Punic Wars and from which Hannibal hailed.
Answer: Carthage (

5171. Peninsula called Hispania by the Romans, through which Hannibal initially invaded Italy.
Answer: Iberian Peninsula

5172. Large war animals that Hannibal led over the Alps.
Answer: War Elephants

5173. Noble family which included Hannibal's father, Hamilcar, and his younger brothers Hasdrubal and Mago.
Answer: Barcas (

5174. Roman rival of Hannibal who defeated him at the Battle of Zama.
Answer: Scipio Africanus (

5175. Devastating victory in which Hannibal annihilated nearly 50,000 Romans in a double envelopment.
Answer: Battle of Cannae [[CAN-nee]]

5176. Diadochi [["DIE"-uh-DOH-kee]] state and enemy of Rome that Hannibal served in the later years of his life.
Answer: Seleucid Empire (or Basileía tōn Seleukidōn

5177. Battle of the Punic War in which Hannibal’s brother Hasdrubal was killed and beheaded.
Answer: Battle of the Metaurus River

5178. Is the largest in the world by discharge volume, and was opened to steamboat travel by Pedro II of Brazil.
Answer: Amazon River (or Rio Amazonas)

5179. Is considered the flowing hair of the god Shiva and was involved in a 1951 water sharing dispute between India and Bangladesh.
Answer: Ganges River (or Ganga

5180. Is a colorfully-named river of China that was strategically flooded by rival nations during the Warring States period.
Answer: Yellow River (or Huáng hé)

5181. Turned black due to the ink from texts once contained in Baghdad's House of Wisdom.
Answer: Tigris River (or Dijlah)

5182. Was explored by Henry Morton Stanley and now names two African countries whose capitals sit across the river from each other.
Answer: Congo River (or Zaire River)

5183. Was the site where Peter the Great determined to build his western-facing capital of St. Petersburg.
Answer: Neva River

5184. Was the site of a 20th century economic miracle in Seoul, South Korea.
Answer: Han River

5185. Caused a blackout in Southern Brazil and Paraguay after transmission lines at its Itaipu Dam failed.
Answer: Paraná River

5186. Chaturanga was an early version of this game, whose early twentieth century champions included Cuban prodigy José Raúl Capablanca. In 2013, World Champion Vishi Anand was defeated by Norwegian (+) Magnus Carlsen, who claims the highest rating ever in this game. The 1972 World Championship in this game between Boris Spassky and Bobby Fischer (*) was considered a "battle" of the Cold War. For ten points, name this "Game of Kings" which boomed in popularity thanks to the Netflix hit The Queen's Gambit.
Answer: Chess (

5187. While this man was enrolled at West Point, he designed the M1913 Cavalry Saber and competed in the 1912 Summer Olympics. This man controversially organized Task Force (+) Baum to rescue his son-in-law, John K. Waters. This general died shortly after being paralyzed in a low-speed car wreck. Infamously chastised for slapping two shell-shocked (*) soldiers, for ten points, name this successful American general known as "Old Blood and Guts."
Answer: George S(mith) Patton Jr.

5188. The polymath Pindar labelled this body the "Inhospitable Sea" and considered travelling in it to be an ill-omen. A "deluge" hypothesis involving this body of water might have inspired the story of (+) Noah's Ark. A Russian victory on this body of water during the Battle of Sinope [[see-NOH-pee]] led to the British and French entering the Crimean War. The Montreux [[mon-TROO]] Convention allowed foreign vessels to pass to and from, (*) for ten points, what sea which borders countries like Ukraine and Turkey?
Answer: Black Sea (

5189. The statue Lifting of the Veil of Ignorance at this location depicts a formerly enslaved man being shown the proper path by its founder. This site's Moton Field served as training grounds for its namesake "Airmen" who (+) fought in the Second World War. An unethical study named for this institution left syphilis untreated in four hundred Black male sharecroppers for forty years to study its effects. George Washington (*) Carver studied at, for ten points, which Alabama university once led by Booker T. Washington?
Answer: Tuskegee Institute (

5190. After the 1979 overthrow of Jean-Bédel Bokassa [[zhen-BEH-dehl boh-KAH- suh]], this man became the world's only reigning "Emperor." This man was almost deposed in the Kyūjō [[KYOO-joh]] incident, (+) which occurred prior to the "Jewel Voice" broadcast. This son of Taisho, [["TIE"-shoh]] and grandson of Meiji [[MEH-jee]], became the only ruler on the Chrysanthemum (*) Throne to experience a foreign occupation after his country was bombed with nuclear weapons. For ten points, name this Japanese emperor during World War Two.
Answer: Hirohito (

5191. The so-called "English Achilles," John Talbot, led a campaign in this century which ended with the disastrous Battle of Castillon [[cah-steh-YOHN]], leading to the loss of (+) Aquitaine. English longbowmen and the deployment of wooden stakes by the British proved vital at the Battle of Agincourt [[ah-jinn-KOHR]], a clash during this century. The Hundred Years' War (*) ended in, for ten points, what century of the late Middle Ages?
Answer: Fifteenth Century (

5192. The Periplus of the Erythraean [[eh-rith-REH-an]] Sea recounts how Rome traded for this commodity with the Chera Dynasty's merchants on the Malabar Coast. Zheng He's [[ZHEHNG HUHS]] voyage through the Indian (+) Ocean led to this spice transforming from a luxury item to a common household product in Ming China. This spice was colloquially known as "black gold" in the early modern period by Europeans. Salt is (*) historically paired with, for ten points, what spice?
Answer: Black Pepper (

5193. Flights from this nation to Belarus were halted in November 2021 to stop Middle Eastern migrants from entering the EU. A 2016 coup attempt in this nation may have been manufactured by its president to purge the military of enemies. The (+) Kurdish PKK party fought an asymmetrical war with this nation's government, which is led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan [[EHR-doh-wahn]]. ISIS (*) may have perpetrated the 2015 Ankara Bombings in, for ten points, what Anatolian nation?
Answer: Republic of Turkey (or Türkiye Cumhuriyeti)

5194. This man signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves, which unintentionally increased the domestic slave trade. In response to British threats to U.S. shipping, this man signed the (+) Embargo Act. In his most famous document, this man wrote that all men have the right to "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of (*) Happiness." For ten points, name this primary author of the Declaration of Independence, the third president of the United States.
Answer: Thomas Jefferson BONUS: FDR claimed December 7th would "live in infamy" after the Japanese surprise attack on this Hawaiian naval base. Pearl Harbor (

5195. Sybil Ludington is nicknamed the “female” counterpart of this figure. This man’s most famous act occurred on “the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-Five” and is the subject of a Henry Wadsworth Longfellow poem that states "one if by land, and two if by sea." For ten points, name this silversmith who warned of approaching British troops during a “midnight ride.”
Answer: Paul Revere

5196. One of these structures built by the Axumite Kingdom was taken to Rome but returned to Ethiopia after Italy signed a UN agreement. The earliest known type of this object was comprised of 120 metric tons of red granite and was meant to commemorate Senusret I in Heliopolis. These structures were said to symbolize the sun god Ra and are topped with a pyramid-shaped capstone. For ten points, name this type of tall, four-sided, monument from Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Obelisks

5197. In this nation, Paul Schäfer [[SHAY-fer]] led an agrarian community known as Dignity Colony that doubled as a post-war refuge for Nazis. The economic policy of a regime in this nation was influenced by the El Ladrillo [[lah-DREE-yoh]] study. A left-wing leader likely killed himself while defending this nation's Moneda [[moh-NEH-dah]] Palace. Augusto Pinochet [[pee-noh-SHEH]] took power in a 1973 coup in, for ten points, what South American nation?
Answer: Republic of Chile (

5198. A painting of this ruler in his study shows a clock in the background at 4:13 a.m and a law code on a table. Paul Delaroche [[deh-lah-ROHSH]] painted a more realistic version of a painting where the names of Charlemagne and Hannibal can be seen on rocks below this leader. That painting by Jacques-Louis David [JAHK LOO-wee DAH-veed]] shows this ruler crossing the Alps. For ten points, name this French Emperor depicted at battles like Austerlitz and Waterloo.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (or Napoleon I of France)

5199. In this ecosystem, deaths attributed to the mountain pine beetle created ladder fuels that resulted in a 1988 wildfire. Drawings and paintings from the Hayden Expedition helped make the case for this place's status. The 4900 bison which live here comprise a namesake herd that is the largest in the United States. In March 1872, the first national park status was granted to, for ten points, what Wyoming-centered home of Old Faithful?
Answer: Yellowstone

5200. An ancient Indo-European example of these systems from the Vučedol [[VOO-cheh- dol]] culture in Croatia was based on Orion. According to a popular myth, the institution of one of these systems by Chesterfield's Act in 1750 resulted in riots around London. Examples of these systems in Europe are named for Julius Caesar and Pope Gregory XIII [[the thirteenth]]. For ten points, name these systems used to organize time into lunar months.
Answer: Calendar (

5201. The only known recording of this man is him repeating the first line of "La Marseillaise" in mocking French. The Ems Dispatch was purposefully released to the press by this man to discredit the government of Napoleon III. This minister annexed the province of Alsace-Lorraine following the Franco-Prussian War. The rise of Wilhelm II led to the deposition of, for ten points, which "Iron Chancellor" who masterminded the unification of Germany?
Answer: Otto von Bismarck (

5202. This man was able to flee Nazi Germany after his consultation and analysis of the royal Princess Marie Bonaparte led to a lifelong friendship between the two. This man developed the idea of the id, ego, and superego, which were founding ideas of psychoanalysis. For ten points, name this Austrian psychologist who wrote The Interpretation of Dreams.
Answer: Sigmund Freud (or Sigismund Schlomo Freud)

5203. One of this man's speeches included what is now known as the "Economic Bill of Rights." This man served as assistant secretary of the Navy during the Wilson administration. This president attempted to curb the "Four Horsemen" by packing the Supreme Court. The Tennessee Valley Authority and Social Security Administration were part of this president's main domestic program. For ten points, name this four-term president who promoted the New Deal.
Answer: Franklin D(elano) Roosevelt (

5204. This geographic point was supposedly first explored by the Greek Eudoxus [[yoo- DOX-us]] around 130 BC. This geographic point was believed to be home to the Flying Dutchman, a pirate ship that haunted sailors. The man who named this entity gives his name to a beach located on it. For ten points, name this cape in South Africa discovered by Bartolomeu Dias that was considered a safe haven for early sailors.
Answer: Cape of Good Hope (or Kaap die Goeie Hoop; or Kaap de Goede Hoop; or Cabo da Boa Esperança) BONUS: This man, who was the first European to reach India by sea, is commemorated along with Bartolomeu Dias with crosses on the Cape. Vasco da Gama

5205. This man, who spent five years in exile in the Netherlands, argued that "the end of law is...to preserve and enlarge freedom." Thomas Jefferson included many of this man's ideas in the Declaration of Independence, although he edited "property" to "the pursuit of happiness." For ten points, name this British "Father of Liberalism" who wrote two Treatises on Government.
Answer: John Locke BONUS: Locke determined that people are inherently rational, unlike this predecessor of his, who described life as "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short" in his work Leviathan. Thomas Hobbes

5206. This river contains Margaret Island, formerly a base for the Knights of Saint John. The mouth of this river, which was known as Okeanos Potamos in antiquity, contains Apollo's sacred island of Alba. This river's basin was crossed by Darius the Great in order to invade the Scythian [[SKIHTH-yen]] realm. The Dacians were separated from the Roman Empire by, for ten points, what river that now runs through European capitals like Budapest and Vienna?
Answer: Danube River (or Donau

5207. During the first of these wars, bureaucratic corruption led to wrong caliber shells being outfitted on Admiral Ding Ruchang's ships, resulting in his loss at the Battle of Yalu River. The Treaty of Shimonoseki ended the first of these wars, giving one power hegemony over Korea. The second of these wars began after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident occurred outside Beijing. For ten points, give this name of two wars between two East Asian superpowers, the first fought between the Qing and the Meiji governments.
Answer: Sino-Japanese War (

5208. An emperor of this dynasty established the Four Commanderies in Korea, the only successful Chinese occupation of the peninsula. This dynasty's dominance of Vietnam was temporarily undermined by the Trung Sisters' rebellion. This dynasty was briefly interrupted by the Xin [[SHIN]] Dynasty of Wang Mang. This dynasty's collapse led to the Three Kingdoms period. For ten points, name this ancient Chinese dynasty that shares its name with the country's majority ethnic group.
Answer: Han Dynasty (or Hàncháo) BONUS: Wang Mang, whose brief reign ended in abject chaos, was a scholar of this Ancient Chinese philosopher, whose principles he hoped to impose on Chinese society. Confucius (

5209. A statue of this man was commissioned in the United States for the thousandth anniversary of the Althing. This explorer encountered the Skraelings [[SKRAY-lings]], who killed his brother Thorvald in a skirmish outside of L'Anse aux Meadows [[LAHN see MEH- doh]]. The region of Vinland was discovered by, for ten points, which Norse explorer and son of Erik the Red?
Answer: Leif Erikson (

5210. During World War Two, this composer served his local community as a fireman, and although he was denounced several times by Josef Stalin, this composer joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1960. This composer had to premiere one piece in Kuybyshev [[KOY-bish-shev]] after being evacuated due to a Nazi siege of a Russian city. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of the "Leningrad Symphony."
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich (or Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich) BONUS: Shostakovich was greatly influenced by this Russian composer who was known for a piece which caused civil unrest after its

5211. Occupation of horse-riding cattle herders that became synonymous with the Wild West.
Answer: Cowboy (or Cowgirl

5212. Short-lived courier service of men on horseback who travelled between the states of Missouri and California.
Answer: Pony Express

5213. Outlaw, known by the pseudonym William H. Bonney, who was shot down by Pat Garrett in New Mexico.
Answer: Billy the Kid (

5214. Politician who hunted bison out West and built a Dakota cattle ranch prior to serving as vice president to William McKinley.
Answer: Theodore Roosevelt Jr (

5215. State, formerly known as the Indian Territory, which was opened up to white settlement in 1889, causing a land rush.
Answer: Oklahoma (

5216. Nickname for Black soldiers who fought in the Plains Wars of the late nineteenth century.
Answer: Buffalo Soldiers

5217. Faith Charlemagne followed, to which he violently converted the Saxons.
Answer: Christianity (or Roman Catholicism)

5218. Germanic people group who formed the majority of the nobility.
Answer: Frankish People (or Franks)

5219. Dynasty of Charlemagne, which included his grandfather Charles Martel and his father Pepin the Short.
Answer: Carolingian (

5220. Dynasty of Charles Martel and Clovis which preceded the rule of Charlemagne.
Answer: Merovingian [[meh-roh-VIN-jin]] Dynasty (or Merovingians)

5221. Royal city of residence known in French as Aix-la-Chapelle [[ay-lah-shah-PEHL]].
Answer: Aachen [[AH-kun]]

5222. 843 treaty which split the empire between Louis the German, Charles the Bald, and Lothair.
Answer: Treaty of Verdun

5223. Asian language first written in Oracle Bones from the Shang Dynasty.
Answer: Chinese (

5224. Writing system used to transcribe the Quran.
Answer: Arabic (or Abjad)

5225. Mesopotamian writing system of wedges etched in clay.
Answer: Cuneiform

5226. Earliest alphabet that was the ancestor of Greek and Latin scripts.
Answer: Phoenician alphabet (

5227. Undeciphered script used by the Minoans on Crete.
Answer: Linear A (do not

5228. Script used to record the victories of Pakal the Great.
Answer: Maya Script (or Maya Glyphs)

5229. A “Great” revolt against colonial rule in this country in the 1920s was led by Sultan Pasha al-Atrash [[ah-TRAHSH]]. Michel Aflaq [[ah-FLAHK]] created the first (+) Ba’ath [[bah-AHTH] party in this country. United with another Arab country in the United Arab Republic, this country lost the Golan [[GOH-lahn]] (*) Heights to Israel in the Yom Kippur War. For ten points, name this country, united with Lebanon in a French mandate and now ruled by the Assad [[ah-SAHD]] family.
Answer: Syrian Arab Republic (or Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah

5230. The Langobards, who once dominated Italy, claimed this deity saw them first thing on the morning of a battle, granting them victory over the Vandals. Roman interaction with the Suebians [[SWEH-byens]] led (+) to their conflating this god with Mercury. This deity was often associated with hanged men due to having hanged himself from Yggdrasil [[EEG-druh-sil]] to gain knowledge. The word Wednesday (*) derives from, for ten points, what chief Nordic deity?
Answer: Odin (

5231. Leather examples of these object are used in a form of theatre performed by the Kannada people to retell stories like the Ramayana. Taiko [[tah-EE-koh]] drummers and tayū chanters are used in a form of theater using these objects named (*) bunraku [[boon-RAH-koo]] native to Japan. Ventriloquism is an art (*) form using, for ten points, what objects that usually represent people and are manipulated for theatre.
Answer: Puppets (

5232. After the Pledge of the Tree, this diplomat guaranteed the procession of the first Umrah pilgrimage by negotiating the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah [[hoo-day-BEE-yah]]. A Pagan-Jewish confederation besieged this man's capital during the Battle of the (+) Trench, some time after this man began a war with the Quraysh [[KOO-raysh]] tribe following the Battle of Badr. The capture of (*) Mecca was accomplished by, for ten points, which general and Prophet of the Islamic faith?
Answer: Muhammad ibn Abdullah (

5233. In Map of True Places, Zee Finch returns to this city to check in on her ailing father. In a novel set in this city, Matthew Maule lays a curse on the entire (*) Pyncheon family as well as their residence, The House of the Seven Gables. This city's Pickering Wharf appears in the beginning of Nathaniel Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter. Giles Corey is executed in an Arthur Miller (*) play in, for ten points, what Massachusetts city in which a series of 1692 Witch Trials took place?
Answer: Salem, Massachu

5234. In Galen's [[GAY-lens]] work On Fallacies, he criticized this philosophical school's inability to use clear language. The emperor Domitian [[doh-MIH-shun]] banished one of this school's philosophers, Epictetus [[eh-PIK-teh-tus]], (+) who returned to Greece and taught Arrian. "Virtue is the only good" was often espoused by supporters of this philosophical school. Zeno (*) of Citium founded, for ten points, what school of philosophy which includes the writer of Meditations, Emperor Marcus Aurelius?
Answer: Stoicism (or Stoics)

5235. Among this document’s new protections was that “no freeman is to be taken or imprisoned… save by lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.” This document was signed on neutral territory between the royal fortress at Windsor Castle (+) and the headquarters of a group of rebellious barons in a water-meadow alongside the River Thames [[TEMS]] called Runnymede. (*) For ten points, name this document that King John signed in 1215, placing limits on royal power.
Answer: Magna Carta Libertatum (

5236. The Kingdom of Kapisa [[kah-PEE-sah]] once ruled this country, which hosts the now-ruined Greek-inspired Buddhas of Bamiyan [[BAH-mee-yahn]]. Those statues were demolished in this country by a (+) Deobandi [[deh-oh-BAHN-dee]] fundamentalist regime, which took power following a Soviet withdrawal. Once led by Hamid Karzai [[hah-MEED KAR-zye]], this country is often referred to as the (*) "graveyard of empires." In 2021, the U.S. pulled its military out of, for ten points, what Pashtun-majority Middle Eastern country controlled by the Taliban?
Answer: Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (

5237. This woman used a papal dispensation supposedly signed by Pius II for her wedding in 1469 because her betrothed was her second cousin. This royal (+) woman’s older half-brother, Henry IV of Castile, attempted to arrange her marriage on several occasions, but she negotiated her own marriage contract with John II (*) of Navarre. For ten points, name this Catholic queen whose marriage to Ferdinand II of Aragon effectively unified Spain.
Answer: Isabella I of Castile (

5238. Sybil Ludington is nicknamed the “female” counterpart of this figure. William Dawes and this man were given similar tasks by Joseph Warren. This man’s most famous act occurred on “the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-Five” and is the subject of a Henry Wadsworth Longfellow poem that states "one if by land, and two if by sea." For ten points, name this silversmith who warned of approaching British troops during a “midnight ride.”
Answer: Paul Revere

5239. One of these structures built by the Axumite Kingdom was taken to Rome but returned to Ethiopia after Italy signed a UN agreement. The earliest known type of this object was comprised of 120 metric tons of red granite, and was meant to commemorate Senusret I in Heliopolis. These structures were said to symbolize the sun god Ra and are topped with a pyramid-shaped capstone. For ten points, name this type of tall, four-sided, monument from Ancient Egypt.
Answer: Obelisks

5240. In this nation, Paul Schäfer [[SHAY-fer]] led an agrarian community known as Dignity Colony that doubled as a post-war refuge for Nazis. The economic policy of a regime in this nation was influenced by the El Ladrillo [[lah-DREE-yoh]] study, first published by the "Chicago Boys." A left-wing leader likely killed himself while defending this nation's Moneda [[moh-NEH-dah]] Palace. Augusto Pinochet [[pee-noh-SHEH]] took power in a 1973 coup in, for ten points, what South American nation?
Answer: Republic of Chile (

5241. A painting of this ruler in his study shows a clock in the background at 4:13 a.m and a law code on a table. Paul Delaroche [[deh-lah-ROHSH]] painted a more realistic version of a painting where the names of Charlemagne and Hannibal can be seen on rocks below this leader. That painting by Jacques-Louis David [JAHK LOO-wee DAH-veed]] shows this ruler crossing the Alps. For ten points, name this French Emperor depicted at battles like Austerlitz and Waterloo.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (or Napoleon I of France)

5242. In this ecosystem, deaths attributed to the mountain pine beetle created ladder fuels that resulted in a 1988 wildfire. Drawings and paintings from the Hayden Expedition and the photographs of William Henry Jackson helped make the case for this place's status. The 4900 bison which live here comprise a namesake herd that is the largest in the United States. In March 1872, the first national park status was granted to, for ten points, what Wyoming- centered home of Old Faithful?
Answer: Yellowstone

5243. An ancient Indo-European example of these systems from the Vučedol [[VOO-cheh- dol]] culture in Croatia was based on Orion. According to a popular myth, the institution of one of these systems by Chesterfield's Act in 1750 resulted in riots around London. Examples of these systems in Europe are named for Julius Caesar and Pope Gregory XIII [[the thirteenth]]. For ten points, name these systems used to organize time into lunar months.
Answer: Calendar (

5244. This man's manager, "Colonel" Tom Parker, stopped him from playing Tony in the 1961 film adaptation of West Side Story. Ed Sullivan initially declared this man's performances "unfit for family viewing" after witnessing his "gyrations" during a performance on the Milton Berle Show. In 2019, the city of Memphis funded an expansion of this man's estate, Graceland. The "King of Rock n' Roll" was, for ten points, what Tennessee singer of Hound Dog" and "Heartbreak Hotel"?
Answer: Elvis Presley (or Elvis Aaron Presley

5245. This man used the proceeds from his Lancaster Caramel Company to start his most famous business. This man built a namesake "Industrial" boarding school in a company town he established in Pennsylvania in 1903. During World War Two, this man’s factories produced "Ration D Bars," a special type of confectionary designed to resist melting. For ten points, name this American founder of a chocolate bar and confectionary company.
Answer: Milton Snavely Hershey

5246. The only known recording of this man is him repeating the first line of "La Marseillaise" in mocking French. The Ems Dispatch was purposefully released to the press by this man to discredit the government of Napoleon III. This minister annexed the province of Alsace-Lorraine following the Franco-Prussian War. The rise of Wilhelm II led to the deposition of, for ten points, which "Iron Chancellor" who masterminded the unification of Germany?
Answer: Otto von Bismarck (

5247. This man was able to flee Nazi Germany after his consultation and analysis of the royal Princess Marie Bonaparte led to a lifelong friendship between the two. The heiress to Tiffany & Co., Dorothy Burlingham, was in a relationship with this man's daughter and fellow psychoanalyst, Anna. This man developed the idea of the id, ego, and superego, which were founding ideas of psychoanalysis. For ten points, name this Austrian psychologist who wrote The Interpretation of Dreams.
Answer: Sigmund Freud (or Sigismund Schlomo Freud)

5248. One of this man's speeches included what is now known as the "Economic Bill of Rights." This man served as assistant secretary of the Navy during the Wilson administration. This president attempted to curb the "Four Horsemen" by packing the Supreme Court. The Tennessee Valley Authority and Social Security Administration were part of this president's main domestic program. For ten points, name this four-term president who promoted the New Deal.
Answer: Franklin D(elano) Roosevelt (

5249. This geographic point was supposedly first explored by the Greek Eudoxus [[yoo- DOX-us]] around 130 BC. This geographic point was believed to be home to the Flying Dutchman, a pirate ship that haunted sailors, and is located in present-day Table Mountain National Park. The man who named this entity gives his name to a beach located on it. For ten points, name this cape in South Africa discovered by Bartolomeu Dias that was considered a safe haven for early sailors.
Answer: Cape of Good Hope (or Kaap die Goeie Hoop; or Kaap de Goede Hoop; or Cabo da Boa Esperança) BONUS: This man, who was the first European to reach India by sea, is commemorated along with Bartolomeu Dias with crosses on the Cape. Vasco da Gama

5250. This man, who spent five years in exile in the Netherlands, argued that "the end of law is...to preserve and enlarge freedom." While serving as a secretary, this man authored the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina. Thomas Jefferson included many of this man's ideas in the Declaration of Independence, although he edited "property" to "the pursuit of happiness." For ten points, name this British "Father of Liberalism" who wrote two Treatises on Government.
Answer: John Locke BONUS: Locke determined that people are inherently rational, unlike this predecessor of his, who described life as "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short" in his work Leviathan. Thomas Hobbes

5251. This river contains Margaret Island, formerly a base for the Knights of Saint John. The mouth of this river, which was known as Okeanos Potamos in antiquity, contains Apollo's sacred island of Alba. This river's basin was the site of the Vinča [[VEEN-tsuh]] culture, and was crossed by Darius the Great in order to invade the Scythian [[SKIHTH-yen]] realm. The Dacians were separated from the Roman Empire by, for ten points, what river that now runs through European capitals like Budapest and Vienna?
Answer: Danube River (or Donau

5252. During the first of these wars, bureaucratic corruption led to wrong caliber shells being outfitted on Admiral Ding Ruchang's ships, resulting in his loss at the Battle of Yalu River. The Treaty of Shimonoseki ended the first of these wars, giving one power hegemony over Korea. The second of these wars began after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident occurred outside Beijing. For ten points, give this name of two wars between two East Asian superpowers, the first fought between the Qing and the Meiji governments.
Answer: Sino-Japanese War (

5253. An emperor of this dynasty established the Four Commanderies in Korea, the only successful Chinese occupation of the peninsula. This dynasty's dominance of Vietnam was temporarily undermined by the Trung Sisters' rebellion. This dynasty was briefly interrupted by the Xin [[SHIN]] Dynasty of Wang Mang. This dynasty's collapse led to the Three Kingdoms period. For ten points, name this ancient Chinese dynasty that shares its name with the country's majority ethnic group.
Answer: Han Dynasty (or Hàncháo) BONUS: Wang Mang, whose brief reign ended in abject chaos, was a scholar of this Ancient Chinese philosopher, whose principles he hoped to impose on Chinese society. Confucius (

5254. A statue of this man was commissioned in the United States for the thousandth anniversary of the Althing. The tale of the lost merchant Bjarni Herjólfsson [[BYAR-nee hare- YOHLF-son]] inspired this man to travel west. This explorer encountered the Skraelings [[SKRAY-lings]], who killed his brother Thorvald in a skirmish outside of L'Anse aux Meadows [[LAHN see MEH-doh]]. The region of Vinland was discovered by, for ten points, which Norse explorer and son of Erik the Red?
Answer: Leif Erikson (

5255. During World War Two, this composer served his local community as a fireman, and although he was denounced several times by Josef Stalin, this composer joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1960. This composer had to premiere one piece in Kuybyshev [[KOY-bish-shev]] after being evacuated due to a Nazi siege of a Russian city. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of the "Leningrad Symphony."
Answer: Dmitri Shostakovich (or Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich) BONUS: Shostakovich was greatly influenced by this Russian composer who was known for a piece which caused civil unrest after its

5256. Occupation of horse-riding cattle herders that became synonymous with the Wild West.
Answer: Cowboy (or Cowgirl

5257. Short-lived courier service of men on horseback who travelled between the states of Missouri and California.
Answer: Pony Express

5258. Outlaw, known by the pseudonym William H. Bonney, who was shot down by Pat Garrett in New Mexico.
Answer: Billy the Kid (

5259. Politician who hunted bison out West and built a Dakota cattle ranch prior to serving as vice president to William McKinley.
Answer: Theodore Roosevelt Jr (

5260. State, formerly known as the Indian Territory, which was opened up to white settlement in 1889, causing a land rush.
Answer: Oklahoma (

5261. Nickname for Black soldiers who fought in the Plains Wars of the late nineteenth century.
Answer: Buffalo Soldiers

5262. "Thesis" put forth by Frederick Jackson Turner that the flux experienced by the North American pioneer shaped America's national character.
Answer: Frontier Thesis

5263. Tribe of the Southern Plains which established an "empire" from Texas to Kansas that collapsed in the 1870s due to smallpox.
Answer: Comanche (

5264. Faith Charlemagne followed, to which he violently converted the Saxons.
Answer: Christianity (or Roman Catholicism)

5265. Germanic people group who formed the majority of the nobility.
Answer: Frankish People (or Franks)

5266. Dynasty of Charlemagne, which included his grandfather Charles Martel and his father Pepin the Short.
Answer: Carolingian (

5267. Dynasty of Charles Martel and Clovis which preceded the rule of Charlemagne.
Answer: Merovingian [[meh-roh-VIN-jin]] Dynasty (or Merovingians)

5268. Royal city of residence known in French as Aix-la-Chapelle [[ay-lah-shah-PEHL]].
Answer: Aachen [[AH-kun]]

5269. 843 treaty which split the empire between Louis the German, Charles the Bald, and Lothair.
Answer: Treaty of Verdun

5270. Inept king and final Carolingian ruler who failed to prevent the Siege of Paris by Viking raiders.
Answer: Charles the Fat (or Charles III; Charles the Simple

5271. Scholar and private secretary of Louis the Pious who wrote a biography of Charlemagne.
Answer: Einhard (or Eginhard)

5272. Asian language first written in Oracle Bones from the Shang Dynasty.
Answer: Chinese (

5273. Writing system used to transcribe the Quran.
Answer: Arabic (or Abjad)

5274. Mesopotamian writing system of wedges etched in clay.
Answer: Cuneiform

5275. Earliest alphabet that was the ancestor of Greek and Latin scripts.
Answer: Phoenician alphabet (

5276. Undeciphered script used by the Minoans on Crete.
Answer: Linear A (do not

5277. Script used to record the victories of Pakal the Great.
Answer: Maya Script (or Maya Glyphs)

5278. Script, also called Harappan, that has been found on pottery all along a namesake river.
Answer: Indus Script (

5279. Country in which the Ge'ez script is used to write several of its native languages.
Answer: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (or Ityop'iya

5280. A “Great” revolt against colonial rule in this country in the 1920s was led by Sultan Pasha al-Atrash [[ah-TRAHSH]]. Michel Aflaq [[ah-FLAHK]] created the first (+) Ba’ath [[bah-AHTH] party in this country. United with another Arab country in the United Arab Republic, this country lost the Golan [[GOH-lahn]] (*) Heights to Israel in the Yom Kippur War. For ten points, name this country, united with Lebanon in a French mandate and now ruled by the Assad [[ah-SAHD]] family.
Answer: Syrian Arab Republic (or Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah

5281. The Langobards, who once dominated Italy, claimed this deity saw them first thing on the morning of a battle, granting them victory over the Vandals. Roman interaction with the Suebians [[SWEH-byens]] led (+) to their conflating this god with Mercury. This deity was often associated with hanged men due to having hanged himself from Yggdrasil [[EEG-druh-sil]] to gain knowledge. The word Wednesday (*) derives from, for ten points, what chief Nordic deity?
Answer: Odin (

5282. Leather examples of these object are used in a form of theatre performed by the Kannada people to retell stories like the Ramayana. Taiko [[tah-EE-koh]] drummers and tayū chanters are used in a form of theater using these objects named (*) bunraku [[boon-RAH-koo]] native to Japan. A form of art using these figures grew in popularity in the U.S. in the vaudeville circuits of the 1800s. (*) Ventriloquism is an art form using, for ten points, what objects that usually represent people and are manipulated for theatre.
Answer: Puppets (

5283. After the Pledge of the Tree, this diplomat guaranteed the procession of the first Umrah pilgrimage by negotiating the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah [[hoo-day-BEE-yah]]. A Pagan-Jewish confederation besieged this man's capital during the Battle of the (+) Trench, some time after this man began a war with the Quraysh [[KOO-raysh]] tribe following the Battle of Badr. The capture of (*) Mecca was accomplished by, for ten points, which general and Prophet of the Islamic faith?
Answer: Muhammad ibn Abdullah (

5284. In Map of True Places, Zee Finch returns to this city to check in on her ailing father. In a novel set in this city, Matthew Maule lays a curse on the entire (*) Pyncheon family as well as their residence, The House of the Seven Gables. This city's Pickering Wharf appears in the beginning of Nathaniel Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter. Giles Corey is executed in an Arthur Miller (*) play in, for ten points, what Massachusetts city in which a series of 1692 Witch Trials took place?
Answer: Salem, Massachu

5285. In Galen's [[GAY-lens]] work On Fallacies, he criticized this philosophical school's inability to use clear language and their disbelief in the duality of the soul. The emperor Domitian [[doh-MIH-shun]] banished one of this school's philosophers, Epictetus [[eh-PIK-teh-tus]], (+) who returned to Greece and taught Arrian. "Virtue is the only good" was often espoused by supporters of this philosophical school. Zeno (*) of Citium founded, for ten points, what school of philosophy which includes the writer of Meditations, Emperor Marcus Aurelius?
Answer: Stoicism (or Stoics)

5286. Among this document’s new protections was that “no freeman is to be taken or imprisoned… save by lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.” This document was signed on neutral territory between the royal fortress at Windsor Castle (+) and the headquarters of a group of rebellious barons in a water-meadow alongside the River Thames [[TEMS]] called Runnymede. (*) For ten points, name this document that King John signed in 1215, placing limits on royal power.
Answer: Magna Carta Libertatum (

5287. The Kingdom of Kapisa [[kah-PEE-sah]] once ruled this country, which hosts the now-ruined Greek-inspired Buddhas of Bamiyan [[BAH-mee-yahn]]. Those statues were demolished in this country by a (+) Deobandi [[deh-oh-BAHN-dee]] fundamentalist regime, which took power following a Soviet withdrawal. Once led by Hamid Karzai [[hah-MEED KAR-zye]], this country is often referred to as the (*) "graveyard of empires." In 2021, the U.S. pulled its military out of, for ten points, what Pashtun-majority Middle Eastern country controlled by the Taliban?
Answer: Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (

5288. This woman used a papal dispensation supposedly signed by Pius II for her wedding in 1469 because her betrothed was her second cousin. This royal (+) woman’s older half-brother, Henry IV of Castile, attempted to arrange her marriage on several occasions, but she negotiated her own marriage contract with John II (*) of Navarre. For ten points, name this Catholic queen whose marriage to Ferdinand II of Aragon effectively unified Spain.
Answer: Isabella I of Castile (

5289. A pilot from this nation unwittingly earned a one-hundred thousand dollar prize from the U.S. Air Force when he turned over of a Soviet MiG-15 fighter. Hatchet-wielding soldiers from this nation killed American servicemen in the Joint Security Area. The Demilitarized Zone is shared between a southern neighbor and, for ten points, what East Asian nation dominated for seven decades by the Kim family?
Answer: North Korea (

5290. The winning side of this battle issued Order Number 227 before its start, commanding soldiers to take "not a step back." Romanian and German forces in this battle were encircled by Operation Uranus, led by Georgy Zhukov. For ten points, name this battle where Friedrich Paulus’s Sixth Army failed to take a city on the Volga named for the leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Battle of Stalingrad

5291. A conflict in this region began in the Battle of the Bogside in 1969. The Sunningdale power-sharing agreement broke down after a general strike in this region. Protesters in this territory’s city of Derry were fired on by paratroopers in “Bloody Sunday.” For ten points, name this smallest constituent country of the United Kingdom in which the Troubles started in the late 1960s.
Answer: Northern Ireland (or Tuaisceart Éireann

5292. A woman in drag named Tullia is nearly hanged by a leader of this empire, Ottone, in a Vivaldi pastoral opera. The Coronation of Poppaea, the last by Claudio Montiverdi, concerns the title mistress's attempt to be crowned queen of this empire. A daughter of a Chief Druid named Norma jumps in a fire with her lover Pollione, the pro-consul of Gaul in this empire, at the end of a Bellini opera. Cesare [[CHAY-zah-ray]] e Cleopatra is set in, for ten points, which ancient European empire?
Answer: Roman Empire (

5293. The outbreak of the Austro-Turkish war forced this composer to move from Vienna to Alsegrund. This man employed his own sister-in-law Josefa Weber [[yoh-SEH-fah VEH- buh]] to perform the role of Queen of the Night in one opera. The marriage of the Emperor's niece led to the city of Prague commissioning this composer's Don Giovanni. The Marriage of Figaro and The Magic Flute were written by, for ten points, which German-language composer of the 18th century?
Answer: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (

5294. The short-lived Free State of Bottleneck was created in this region from a narrow gap in the Wisper Valley between Allied occupation zones. A pact recognizing this region's western borders was the principal portion of the Locarno Treaties in 1925. In direct violation of the Treaty of Versailles [[vehr-SYE]], Adolf Hitler ordered the remilitarization of, for ten points, what region in 1936?
Answer: Rhineland (

5295. Frederick Jackson Turner's Frontier Thesis claims "American Democracy" was not established on this object or the Susan Constant. The springing of a leak by the accompanying Speedwell led to William Bradford deciding to solely use this ship for a western voyage. A rudimentary government for Plymouth known as its namesake "Compact" was signed on this vessel. For ten points, name this ship that transported the Pilgrims to the New World.
Answer: Mayflower

5296. William Hogarth depicted a young merchant wasting his money in this city and eventually being placed in its Fleet Prison in A Rake's Progress. Waterloo Bridge and Charing Cross Bridge are included in Claude Monet's scenes from this city, which include a series on the Houses of Parliament. Canaletto painted The Thames and the City depicting, for ten points, which English capital city that contains the Tate Modern?
Answer: London

5297. In this city's amphitheater, Pink Floyd member David Gilmour gave the first public concert here in over 1,900 years. This site includes the ancient House of the Surgeon, as well as several artworks depicting Greek mythology in the House of the Tragic Poet. The Alexander Mosaic is found in this site's House of the Faun, which occupies an entire insula. For ten points, name this city which, along with Herculaneum, was destroyed by the 79 C.E. eruption of Mount Vesuvius.
Answer: Pompeii (or Pumpeje) BONUS: Pompeii is close to this modern Italian city, which was conquered by the Romans during the Samnite Wars. It was later the longest-serving capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Naples (or Napoli; or Napule

5298. One leader of this nation launched the Infitah [[in-fee-TAH]] policy, which "opened the door" to western investment. During a parade celebrating Operation Badr [[BAD-er]] in this nation, that leader was assassinated by members of the Islamic Jihad. Protests in this country's Tahrir Square in 2011 led to the ousting of long-time president Hosni Mubarak. Since 2014, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has served as president of, for ten points, what Arab nation governed from Cairo?
Answer: Egypt (or Misr

5299. This ruler approached his cousin of the same name to force him to become dictator, though that Grand Duke responded by pointing a pistol at his own head and threatening to fire. That episode occurred during the Revolution of 1905, in which this ruler's forces fired on demonstrators during "Bloody Sunday" at the Winter Palace. The Russo-Japanese War was lost by, for ten points, which Tsar who was later killed by the Bolsheviks?
Answer: Nicholas II (

5300. The Postmaster General in the Harding Cabinet, Will H. Hays, names a regulatory "Code" for this industry. The revival of the Second Ku Klux Klan in Stone Mountain, Georgia was sparked by a production in this industry called Birth of a Nation. For ten points, name this industry whose studios were forbidden from owning theaters in the court case United States v. Paramount Pictures.
Answer: Film (

5301. In one poem, William Wordsworth referred to this site as an "Inmate of lonesome Nature's endless year." After stabbing Alec, Tess of the D'urbervilles finally surrenders to police at this monument, which lies in Wiltshire. The works of William Stukeley led to the popular connection between this monument and the order of druids. For ten points, name this prehistoric monument on the Salisbury Plain that is often featured in British literature.
Answer: Stonehenge BONUS: In a radio serial, this fictional detective investigates the death of a Presbyterian minister at Stonehenge. This character's aide was wounded while fighting in Afghanistan during the Great Game era. Sherlock Holmes

5302. This was the most popular service restricted by India following a conflict near Ladakh. Along with WeChat, this service was the subject of an executive order giving it forty- five days to divest its U.S. holdings or be purchased by an American company. In 2018, this service's parent company, ByteDance, merged it with Musical.ly, a similar Chinese social media service. For ten points, name this popular video-sharing social networking service, known in China as Douyin.
Answer: TikTok (

5303. This man was unknowingly given small dosages of methamphetamines by Max Jacobson, who was nicknamed "Dr. Feelgood." This politician defeated incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. in a 1952 Senate race. This president negotiated with Nikita Khrushchev [[KROO-shev]] during the Cuban Missile Crisis and was in office during the botched Bay of Pigs invasion. The youngest person ever elected president was, for ten points, which Massachusetts politician?
Answer: John F. Kennedy (both underlined portions required

5304. A thinker from this country criticized the Gotha [[GOH-tah]] Programme of its Social Democratic Party in one pamphlet. Another thinker from this country argued that a “Protestant work ethic” enabled the development of modern capitalism and suggested that the state held a monopoly on the legitimate use of violence. Two writers originally from this country wrote the Communist Manifesto. For ten points, name this homeland of Friedrich Engels, Max Weber [[VEH-buh]], and Karl Marx.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland

5305. Japanese warrior nobles which first appeared during the period.
Answer: Samurai

5306. Military position first held by Minamoto no Yoritomo [[mih-nah-MOH-toh noh toh- ree-TOH-moh]], making him the de facto head of Japan.
Answer: Shogun (or Sei-i Taishōgun)

5307. "Divine Wind," likely a typhoon, which sunk the Mongol navy in their attempt to conquer Japan.
Answer: Kamikaze [[KAH-mee-KAH-zeh]]

5308. Sect of Buddhism introduced to Japan by Dōgen [[DOH-gen]].
Answer: Zen Buddhism (

5309. Landless warriors whom warlords hired to supplement armies during the dynastic conflicts of the period.
Answer: Rōnin

5310. Clan whose leader Takauji [[tah-kah-OO-jee]] established himself as leader of Japan in 1337.
Answer: Ashikaga [[AH-shee-KAH-gah]] (

5311. French Emperor whose deposition and exile led to the convening of the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

5312. Nation, known as the Helvetic Republic under Napoleonic rule, whose 22 cantons had their perpetual neutrality guaranteed.
Answer: Switzerland (

5313. Kingdom tied to the Russian throne which was formerly known as the Duchy of Warsaw.
Answer: Kingdom of Poland (or Królestwo Polskie

5314. Austrian statesman who organized the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Klemens von Metternich (or Klemens Wenzel Nepomuk Lothar, Prince of Metternich-Winneburg zu Beilstein)

5315. Tsar of Russia who seized the Grand Duchy of Finland for himself at the congress.
Answer: Alexander I (

5316. Diplomat and perpetual turncoat who represented France at the Congress.
Answer: Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand

5317. American territory-turned-independent nation whose capital was named for the fifth U.S. president.
Answer: Republic of Liberia

5318. Former member of French West Africa which is named for a medieval African empire led by mansas.
Answer: Republic of Mali (or République du Mali; or Mali ka Fasojamana; or Renndaandi Maali)

5319. Nation formed in 1957 from the Gold Coast and Ashanti colonies, led by Kwame Nkrumah [[KWAH-meh en-KROO-muh]]
Answer: Republic of Ghana

5320. North African country whose war for independence led to the collapse of the French Fourth Republic.
Answer: People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (or al-Jumhūriyya al-Jazāʾiriyya ad- Dīmuqrāṭiyya aš-Šaʿbiyya; or République algérienne démocratique et populaire)

5321. British colony which experienced the Mau Mau Uprising before becoming independent in 1963.
Answer: Republic of Kenya (or Jamhuri ya Kenya)

5322. Former German colony which became independent from South Africa in 1990.
Answer: Republic of Namibia

5323. Under this prime minister, a scandal over the merger of Westland Helicopters led to the resignation of Defense Secretary Michael Heseltine. “Flying (+) pickets” were used by National Union of Mineworkers during a strike under this prime minister. This leader’s victory in the Falklands War allowed a landslide Conservative victory in the 1983 (*) general election. For ten points, name this “Iron Lady,” the prime minister of the United Kingdom during the 1980s.
Answer: Margaret Thatcher (or Margaret Hilda Thatcher; Baroness Thatcher)

5324. The Antikythera [[AN-tih-kih-THEER-uh]] mechanism is believed to be the oldest example of an analogue type of this device. German engineer Konrad Zuse [[ZOO-suh]] developed the Z3 (+), the first programmable digital example of these devices, during World War (*) Two. For ten points, name these devices that rapidly carry out mathematical operations, the "science" for which was pioneered by Alan Turing.
Answer: Computers (

5325. This man delivered a speech condemning Operation Danube, declaring it was a "grave error and constituted a serious danger to peace in Europe." One of this man's first actions as head of state was to pass Decree 770 in order to boost (+) population by making abortion illegal. Following this man's overthrow, he and his wife were found guilty of corruption and (*) genocide and were sentenced to death by the National Salvation Front. For ten points, name this Romanian communist dictator.
Answer: Nicolae Ceaușescu [[NIK-oh-lye chow-SHESS-koo]]

5326. This person's first purported miracle occurred when a locket containing their image supposedly rid Monica Besra of a malignant tumor. This figure faced controversy for her tacit support of her homeland's Hoxha [[HOH-shuh]] regime (+) and Indira Gandhi's suspension of civil liberties during "The Emergency." This woman of Albanian descent founded the Missionaries of Charity and served the slums of (*) Kolkata. For ten points, name this Nobel Peace Prize winner and canonized nun of the 20th century.
Answer: Mother Teresa (

5327. This monument’s astylar design was developed by the Neoclassical sculptor Jean Chalgrin [[SHAHL-grin]]. The base of this monument contains four sculptural groups, including one by Antoine (*) Etex said to commemorate the Peace of 1815. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier beneath this monument was commissioned after the Battle of (*) Austerlitz. For ten points, name this monument found at the western end of the Champs-Élysées [[SHAHMPS eh-lee-SAY]] in Paris.
Answer: Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile (

5328. This man urged the common British person to abandon so-called "dying metaphors" in his essay "Politics and the English Language." This writer's participation in the POUM (*) party's militia during the Spanish Civil War inspired his autobiographical Homage to Catalonia. The rise of totalitarianism (*) inspired, for ten points, which British writer's 1984 and Animal Farm?
Answer: George Orwell (

5329. Polish forces deployed an armored variant of this product known as the "FT-B" in an effort to repel a Russian invasion during the 1920 Polish-Soviet War. The creator of this product joked that you can have it "any color (+), so long as it is black" during a board meeting. This was the most sold automobile (*) of the early 20th century. The "Tin Lizzie" was a nickname for, for ten points, which first mass-produced car created by the Ford Motor Company?
Answer: Ford Model T (

5330. Gepid king Ardaric quickly collapsed an empire named for these people after gathering its former subject tribes and defeating them at the Battle of Nedao [[NEH- dow]]. Allied with the Visigothic king Theoderic, (+) the Roman general Flavius Aetius [[AY-shus]] stopped these people's advance into Western Europe at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. Much of 5th century (*) Europe was ravaged by, for ten points, what nomadic people led by Attila?
Answer: Huns (

5331. This leader was born in the Duchy of Bar and petitioned Robert de Baudricourt [[bahw-dreh-KOR]] for an escort to Paris. This figure, who was sent by Charles VII [[the seventh]] to (+) relieve a besieged city following a vision from Saint Catherine of Alexandria, was captured in 1430 by the Burgundian faction and burned at the stake by the (*) English. For ten points, name this "Maid of Orléans," [[ohr-LEH-ahn]] a French hero of the Hundred Years' War.
Answer: Saint Joan of Arc (or Jeanne d'Arc

5332. A pilot from this nation unwittingly earned a one-hundred thousand dollar prize from the U.S. Air Force when he turned over of a Soviet MiG-15 fighter. Hatchet-wielding soldiers from this nation killed American servicemen in the Joint Security Area, to which the U.S. responded by mobilizing an entire taskforce to cut down a poplar tree in Operation Paul Bunyan. The Demilitarized Zone is shared between a southern neighbor and, for ten points, what East Asian nation dominated for seven decades by the Kim family?
Answer: North Korea (

5333. This man piloted a Gonzalo Coelho [[koo-EL-hoh]] voyage to Brazil which encountered its discoverer, Pedro Cabral. This Florentine worked for merchant Gianotto Berardi, who was an early investor in the 1492 Columbus expedition. The cartographer Martin Waldseemüller [[VAHLD-zee-MEW-luh]] was influenced by the Soderini letter to name a landmass for this explorer. For ten points, what Italian navigator, who is credited with coining the term "New World, is the namesake of two continents in the western hemisphere?
Answer: Amerigo Vespucci

5334. The winning side of this battle issued Order Number 227 before its start, commanding soldiers to take "not a step back." Mamayev [[MAH-mah-yev]] Kurgan and Pavlov’s House were heavily contested locales during this battle. Romanian and German forces in this battle were encircled by Operation Uranus, led by Georgy Zhukov. For ten points, name this battle where Friedrich Paulus’s Sixth Army failed to take a city on the Volga named for the leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Battle of Stalingrad

5335. Polish forces deployed an armored variant of this product known as the "FT-B" in an effort to repel a Russian invasion during the 1920 Polish-Soviet War. The creator of this product joked that you can have it "any color, so long as it is black" during a board meeting. This was the most sold automobile of the early 20th century. The "Tin Lizzie" was a nickname for, for ten points, which first mass-produced car created by the Ford Motor Company?
Answer: Ford Model T (

5336. A conflict in this region began in the Battle of the Bogside in 1969. The Sunningdale power-sharing agreement broke down after a general strike in this region, and a sectarian conflict in this region led to the fall of its parliament at Stormont. Protesters in this territory’s city of Derry were fired on by paratroopers in “Bloody Sunday.” For ten points, name this smallest constituent country of the United Kingdom in which the Troubles started in the late 1960s.
Answer: Northern Ireland (or Tuaisceart Éireann

5337. A woman in drag named Tullia is nearly hanged by a leader of this empire, Ottone, in a Vivaldi pastoral opera. The Coronation of Poppaea, the last by Claudio Montiverdi, concerns the title mistress's attempt to be crowned queen of this empire. A daughter of a Chief Druid named Norma jumps in a fire with her lover Pollione, the pro-consul of Gaul in this empire, at the end of a Bellini opera. Cesare [[CHAY-zah-ray]] e Cleopatra is set in, for ten points, which ancient European empire?
Answer: Roman Empire (

5338. The outbreak of the Austro-Turkish war forced this composer to move from Vienna to Alsegrund. This man employed his own sister-in-law Josefa Weber [[yoh-SEH-fah VEH- buh]] to perform the role of Queen of the Night in one opera. The marriage of the Emperor's niece led to the city of Prague commissioning this composer's Don Giovanni. The Marriage of Figaro and The Magic Flute were written by, for ten points, which German-language composer of the 18th century?
Answer: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (

5339. The short-lived Free State of Bottleneck was created in this region from a narrow gap in the Wisper Valley between Allied occupation zones. A brief "Cis" Republic in this region was a client state of Revolutionary France before being annexed. A pact recognizing this region's western borders was the principal portion of the Locarno Treaties in 1925. In direct violation of the Treaty of Versailles [[vehr-SYE]], Adolf Hitler ordered the remilitarization of, for ten points, what region in 1936?
Answer: Rhineland (

5340. Frederick Jackson Turner's Frontier Thesis claims "American Democracy" was not established on this object or the Susan Constant. The springing of a leak by the accompanying Speedwell led to William Bradford deciding to solely use this ship for a western voyage. A rudimentary government for Plymouth known as its namesake "Compact" was signed on this vessel. For ten points, name this ship that transported the Pilgrims to the New World.
Answer: Mayflower

5341. William Hogarth depicted a young merchant wasting his money in this city and eventually being placed in its Fleet Prison in A Rake's Progress. Waterloo Bridge and Charing Cross Bridge are included in Claude Monet's scenes from this city, which include a series on the Houses of Parliament. Canaletto painted The Thames and the City depicting, for ten points, which English capital city that contains the Tate Modern?
Answer: London

5342. In this city's amphitheater, Pink Floyd member David Gilmour gave the first public concert here in over 1,900 years. This site includes the ancient House of the Surgeon, as well as several artworks depicting Greek mythology in the House of the Tragic Poet. The Alexander Mosaic is found in this site's House of the Faun, which occupies an entire insula. For ten points, name this city which, along with Herculaneum, was destroyed by the 79 C.E. eruption of Mount Vesuvius.
Answer: Pompeii (or Pumpeje) BONUS: Pompeii is close to this modern Italian city, which was conquered by the Romans during the Samnite Wars. It was later the longest-serving capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Naples (or Napoli; or Napule

5343. One leader of this nation launched the Infitah [[in-fee-TAH]] policy, which "opened the door" to western investment. During a parade celebrating Operation Badr [[BAD-er]] in this nation, that leader was assassinated by members of the Islamic Jihad. Protests in this country's Tahrir Square in 2011 led to the ousting of long-time president Hosni Mubarak. Since 2014, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has served as president of, for ten points, what Arab nation governed from Cairo?
Answer: Egypt (or Misr

5344. This ruler approached his cousin of the same name to force him to become dictator, though that Grand Duke responded by pointing a pistol at his own head and threatening to fire. That episode occurred during the Revolution of 1905, in which this ruler's forces fired on demonstrators during "Bloody Sunday" at the Winter Palace. The Russo-Japanese War was lost by, for ten points, which Tsar who was later killed by the Bolsheviks?
Answer: Nicholas II (

5345. The Postmaster General in the Harding Cabinet, Will H. Hays, names a regulatory "Code" for this industry, which banned depictions of "homosexuality" and "unnecessary violence." The revival of the Second Ku Klux Klan in Stone Mountain, Georgia was sparked by a production in this industry called Birth of a Nation. For ten points, name this industry whose studios were forbidden from owning theaters in the court case United States v. Paramount Pictures.
Answer: Film (

5346. In one poem, William Wordsworth referred to this site as an "Inmate of lonesome Nature's endless year." After stabbing Alec, Tess of the D'urbervilles finally surrenders to police at this monument, which lies in Wiltshire. The works of William Stukeley led to the popular connection between this monument and the order of druids. For ten points, name this prehistoric monument on the Salisbury Plain that is often featured in British literature.
Answer: Stonehenge BONUS: In a radio serial, this fictional detective investigates the death of a Presbyterian minister at Stonehenge. This character's aide was wounded while fighting in Afghanistan during the Great Game era. Sherlock Holmes

5347. This was the most popular service restricted by India following a conflict near Ladakh. Along with WeChat, this service was the subject of an executive order giving it forty- five days to divest its U.S. holdings or be purchased by an American company. In 2018, this service's parent company, ByteDance, merged it with Musical.ly, a similar Chinese social media service. For ten points, name this popular video-sharing social networking service, known in China as Douyin.
Answer: TikTok (

5348. This man was unknowingly given small dosages of methamphetamines by Max Jacobson, who was nicknamed "Dr. Feelgood." This politician defeated incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. in a 1952 Senate race. This president negotiated with Nikita Khrushchev [[KROO-shev]] during the Cuban Missile Crisis and was in office during the botched Bay of Pigs invasion. The youngest person ever elected president was, for ten points, which Massachusetts politician?
Answer: John F. Kennedy (both underlined portions required

5349. A thinker from this country criticized the Gotha [[GOH-tah]] Programme of its Social Democratic Party in one pamphlet. Another thinker from this country argued that a “Protestant work ethic” enabled the development of modern capitalism and suggested that the state held a monopoly on the legitimate use of violence. Two writers originally from this country wrote the Communist Manifesto. For ten points, name this homeland of Friedrich Engels, Max Weber [[VEH-buh]], and Karl Marx.
Answer: Germany (or Deutschland

5350. Japanese warrior nobles which first appeared during the period.
Answer: Samurai

5351. Military position first held by Minamoto no Yoritomo [[mih-nah-MOH-toh noh toh- ree-TOH-moh]], making him the de facto head of Japan.
Answer: Shogun (or Sei-i Taishōgun)

5352. "Divine Wind," likely a typhoon, which sunk the Mongol navy in their attempt to conquer Japan.
Answer: Kamikaze [[KAH-mee-KAH-zeh]]

5353. Sect of Buddhism introduced to Japan by Dōgen [[DOH-gen]].
Answer: Zen Buddhism (

5354. Landless warriors whom warlords hired to supplement armies during the dynastic conflicts of the period.
Answer: Rōnin

5355. Clan whose leader Takauji [[tah-kah-OO-jee]] established himself as leader of Japan in 1337.
Answer: Ashikaga [[AH-shee-KAH-gah]] (

5356. Brief "Restoration" by Go-Daigo [[goh-"die"-GOH]] which overthrew the Kamakura in favor of direct imperial rule.
Answer: Kenmu Restoration (or Kenmu no shinsei)

5357. War between the Taira [[tah-EE-rah]] and Minamoto clans that led to the establishment of the Kamakura.
Answer: Genpei War [[gen-PAY]] (

5358. French Emperor whose deposition and exile led to the convening of the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Napoleon Bonaparte (

5359. Nation, known as the Helvetic Republic under Napoleonic rule, whose 22 cantons had their perpetual neutrality guaranteed.
Answer: Switzerland (

5360. Kingdom tied to the Russian throne which was formerly known as the Duchy of Warsaw.
Answer: Kingdom of Poland (or Królestwo Polskie

5361. Austrian statesman who organized the Congress of Vienna.
Answer: Klemens von Metternich (or Klemens Wenzel Nepomuk Lothar, Prince of Metternich-Winneburg zu Beilstein)

5362. Tsar of Russia who seized the Grand Duchy of Finland for himself at the congress.
Answer: Alexander I (

5363. Diplomat and perpetual turncoat who represented France at the Congress.
Answer: Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand

5364. French military commander who was allowed to retain his role as regent of Sweden, eventually becoming its king.
Answer: Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte (

5365. Island kingdom that unified with Savoy and regained its mainland territories in the Congress.
Answer: Kingdom of Sardinia (

5366. American territory-turned-independent nation whose capital was named for the fifth U.S. president.
Answer: Republic of Liberia

5367. Former member of French West Africa which is named for a medieval African empire led by mansas.
Answer: Republic of Mali (or République du Mali; or Mali ka Fasojamana; or Renndaandi Maali)

5368. Nation formed in 1957 from the Gold Coast and Ashanti colonies, led by Kwame Nkrumah [[KWAH-meh en-KROO-muh]]
Answer: Republic of Ghana

5369. North African country whose war for independence led to the collapse of the French Fourth Republic.
Answer: People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (or al-Jumhūriyya al-Jazāʾiriyya ad- Dīmuqrāṭiyya aš-Šaʿbiyya; or République algérienne démocratique et populaire)

5370. British colony which experienced the Mau Mau Uprising before becoming independent in 1963.
Answer: Republic of Kenya (or Jamhuri ya Kenya)

5371. Portuguese-speaking country whose civil war included the participation of Cuban troops.
Answer: Republic of Angola (or República de Angola)

5372. Former German colony which became independent from South Africa in 1990.
Answer: Republic of Namibia

5373. Secessionist Igbo state that broke away from Nigeria during their post- independence civil war.
Answer: Republic of Biafra

5374. Under this prime minister, a scandal over the merger of Westland Helicopters led to the resignation of Defense Secretary Michael Heseltine. “Flying (+) pickets” were used by National Union of Mineworkers during a strike under this prime minister. This leader’s victory in the Falklands War allowed a landslide Conservative victory in the 1983 (*) general election. For ten points, name this “Iron Lady,” the prime minister of the United Kingdom during the 1980s.
Answer: Margaret Thatcher (or Margaret Hilda Thatcher; Baroness Thatcher)

5375. The Antikythera [[AN-tih-kih-THEER-uh]] mechanism is believed to be the oldest example of an analogue type of this device. The Difference Engine was (+) a prototype of one of these devices built by Charles Babbage. German engineer Konrad Zuse [[ZOO-suh]] developed the Z3, the first programmable digital example of these devices, during World War (*) Two. For ten points, name these devices that rapidly carry out mathematical operations, the "science" for which was pioneered by Alan Turing.
Answer: Computers (

5376. This man delivered a speech condemning Operation Danube, declaring it was a "grave error and constituted a serious danger to peace in Europe." One of this man's first actions as head of state was to pass Decree 770 in order to boost (+) population by making abortion illegal. Following this man's overthrow, he and his wife were found guilty of corruption and (*) genocide and were sentenced to death by the National Salvation Front. For ten points, name this Romanian communist dictator.
Answer: Nicolae Ceaușescu [[NIK-oh-lye chow-SHESS-koo]]

5377. This person's first purported miracle occurred when a locket containing their image supposedly rid Monica Besra of a malignant tumor. This figure faced controversy for her tacit support of her homeland's Hoxha [[HOH-shuh]] regime (+) and Indira Gandhi's suspension of civil liberties during "The Emergency." This woman of Albanian descent founded the Missionaries of Charity and served the slums of (*) Kolkata. For ten points, name this Nobel Peace Prize winner and canonized nun of the 20th century.
Answer: Mother Teresa (

5378. This monument’s astylar design was developed by the Neoclassical sculptor Jean Chalgrin [[SHAHL-grin]]. The base of this monument contains four sculptural groups, including one by Antoine (*) Etex said to commemorate the Peace of 1815 and one by François [[frahn-SWAH]] Rude called Departure of the Volunteers of 1792. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier beneath this monument was commissioned after the Battle of (*) Austerlitz. For ten points, name this monument found at the western end of the Champs-Élysées [[SHAHMPS eh-lee-SAY]] in Paris.
Answer: Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile (

5379. This man urged the common British person to abandon so-called "dying metaphors" in his essay "Politics and the English Language." This writer's participation in the POUM (*) party's militia during the Spanish Civil War inspired his autobiographical Homage to Catalonia. This man's time as police sub-commandant in British Burma inspired his short story "Shooting an Elephant." The rise of totalitarianism (*) inspired, for ten points, which British writer's 1984 and Animal Farm?
Answer: George Orwell (

5380. Dominique de Gourgues [[GOORZH]] temporarily reestablished French hegemony in the north of this state by seizing Fort Caroline. A 1521 voyage to this modern state ended with its leader dying following a skirmish with the Calusa people. (*) The oldest continuously inhabited settlement in the U.S. is in this state. The conquistador Juan Ponce de Leon searched for the "Fountain of (*) Youth" in, for ten points, which Southern U.S. state that contains St. Augustine?
Answer: Florida (

5381. Gepid king Ardaric quickly collapsed an empire named for these people after gathering its former subject tribes and defeating them at the Battle of Nedao [[NEH- dow]]. Allied with the Visigothic king Theoderic, (+) the Roman general Flavius Aetius [[AY-shus]] stopped these people's advance into Western Europe at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. Much of 5th century (*) Europe was ravaged by, for ten points, what nomadic people led by Attila?
Answer: Huns (

5382. This leader was born in the Duchy of Bar and petitioned Robert de Baudricourt [[bahw-dreh-KOR]] for an escort to Paris. This figure, who was sent by Charles VII [[the seventh]] to (+) relieve a besieged city following a vision from Saint Catherine of Alexandria, was captured in 1430 by the Burgundian faction and burned at the stake by the (*) English. For ten points, name this "Maid of Orléans," [[ohr-LEH-ahn]] a French hero of the Hundred Years' War.
Answer: Saint Joan of Arc (or Jeanne d'Arc

5383. The Soviet Union boycotted this event in favor of their own Spartakiad to be hosted in Barcelona the following year. Prior to this event, Adidas founder Adolf Dassler convinced Jesse Owens to wear his shoes prior to the Long Jump competition. For ten points, name this 1936 athletic event hosted by the government of Adolf Hitler in the German capital.
Answer: Berlin Olympics (

5384. This man's work on animal respiration utilized his friend and human guinea pig Armand Séguin [[seh-GWEEN]]. This man formulated the law of conservation of mass and named oxygen and hydrogen before being executed during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this French scientist who is considered the father of modern chemistry.
Answer: Antoine Lavoisier (or Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier)

5385. A follower of the priest Iliodor [[ill-YOH-dor]] attempted to assassinate this man by stabbing him in the stomach. Another attempted assassination of this man involved feeding him cyanide-laced cake before he was finally killed with a bullet to the head by Felix Yusupov. This holy man claimed to have cured Alexei Romanov of hemophilia. For ten points, name this Russian mystic whose influence grew due to his closeness with Empress Alexandra.
Answer: Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin

5386. The Romano-British syncretized this deity with the Celtic figure Sulis, forming a duo who protected over the thermal waters of Bath. This goddess, whom the Etruscans showed uncharacteristically hurling lightning bolts, was often depicted in fresco reliefs with a lowered sword as opposed to her more vicious parallel, Mars. For ten points, which Roman goddess of wisdom and war's Greek analogue is Athena?
Answer: Minerva (

5387. Over 300 eunuchs and maids died in this city's Old Summer Palace following its intentional burning by the British under Lord Elgin. Prince Gong signed an 1860 treaty named for this city, ceding parts of Manchuria to Russia and leasing Kowloon to Britain. Following the Northern Expedition, central authority was moved south from this city to Nanjing. The Forbidden City is located in, for ten points, what modern capital of China?
Answer: Beijing (or Beiping

5388. In Islamic tradition, this figure will kill the malevolent ad-Dajjal [[ahd-dah-JAHL]] and both Gog and Magog during the Second Coming. The Cathedral of Turin houses a shroud supposedly bearing the face of this man, whose execution apparatus was split into several pieces that are considered relics in the Christian church. For ten points, name this holy figure who was executed under Roman law in Judea, being nailed to the True Cross.
Answer: Jesus Christ (

5389. Near the Syr Darya, this empire's forces burned their entire baggage train during the "Day of Thirst" while being harassed by the Turgesh Khanate. Forces of this dynasty's Yazid I killed Husayn ibn Ali to win the Battle of Karbala, sparking the Second Fitna. This dynasty fled to Iberia after being overthrown by the Abbasid dynasty. For ten points, name this successor of the "Rightly Guided" caliphs, an empire which conquered much of North Africa and Western Asia.
Answer: Umayyad Caliphate (

5390. Though Milton Obote [[oh-BOH-teh]] was restored to this country's presidency after a brief war with Tanzania, he did not restore its traditional kingdoms such as Ankole [[ahn- KOH-leh]]. Obote's predecessor proclaimed himself Conqueror of the British Empire and expelled this country's Asian population while declaring himself King of Scotland. During that dictator's rule, Israel rescued over 100 hostages from this country in Operation Entebbe [[en- TEH-beh]]. For ten points, name this country, once ruled by Idi Amin.
Answer: Republic of Uganda

5391. In 2021, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of two people of this profession who argued workers could not unionize on their property. Thomas Jefferson called people with this profession "the chosen people of God," and this profession was one of the most severely affected by the Dust Bowl. For ten points, name this profession involved in growing crops and raising animals for consumption.
Answer: Farmers (

5392. One account of this conflict ends at the Battle of Ascalon, where Godfrey of Bouillon [[boo-YOHN]] drove off the army of the Fatimids. Seljuk leader Kilij [[kee-LEEJ]] Arslan's lightly armored horse archers were defeated in this conflict by a combined Italo-Norman force at Dorylaeum [[DOR-ee-LAY-uhm]]. A Byzantine request for aid led to, for ten points, what 11th century war to recapture of the Holy Land from Muslim control?
Answer: First Crusade (

5393. One president of this nation engineered an eighth term as president in 1910, leading to his overthrow by Francisco Madero and a ten-year civil war. Benito Juárez [[HWAH-rehz]] governed this country, but was overthrown by an Austrian archduke. Emperor Maximilian was executed after failing to conquer, for ten points, what country where Cinco de Mayo commemorates a victory over France?
Answer: Mexico (

5394. John Boehner [[BAY-ner]] resigned from this position in 2015 following a speech from Pope Francis the day prior. This position is second in the U.S. line of succession following the vice president. The current holder of this position represents the 12th District of California and went viral for a GIF of her clapping at Donald Trump in 2019. For ten points, name this elected leader of the lower chamber of the U.S. Congress, which is currently held by Nancy Pelosi.
Answer: Speaker of the House of Representatives BONUS: The First Speaker of the House was Frederick Muhlenberg, whose inaccurate "legend" claims that he stopped what European language from becoming the official tongue of the United

5395. During the 1904 Olympic iteration of one of these events in St. Louis, Cuban mailman Andarín Carvajal [[kar-vah-HAHL]] took a nap after breaking a forty hour fast by eating rotten apples. The Chechen-descended Tsarnaev [[zar-"NIGH"-yef]] brothers targeted the 2013 Boston iteration of these sporting events by using homemade bombs. The legendary run of Pheidippides [[fy-DIH-peh-deez]] from a battle site to Athens inspired, for ten points, what long-distance running events?
Answer: Marathons (

5396. This island attempted to secede from one country after the "Grito de Lares" [[GREE- toh deh LAH-rehs]]. This non-Cuban island was controlled by the Spanish since the defeat of the native Taíno [[tah-EE-noh]] by Juan Ponce de León, who became this island's first governor. This island became a "Commonwealth" in 1952, and movements for full integration and independence have competed since then. For ten points, name this Caribbean territory of the United States, a potential 51st state.
Answer: Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (

5397. This region's eastern part was split off as the Union Territory of Ladakh. This region's inhabitants were separated after a 1947 war that reflected tensions between its Maharaja Hari Singh and this region's majority-Muslim population. With a Line of Control between two parts of this region ending at the Siachen [[see-AH-chen]] Glacier, for ten points, what is this region which is disputed by India and Pakistan?
Answer: Kashmir (

5398. This country's 1960 independence was established by the London and Zürich Agreements. One leader of this country survived four assassination attempts and was given the title "Ethnarch." This country pursued a union with a larger country in a process called Enosis [[ee-NOH-siss]]. This country's north has been occupied since 1973 by Turkey and is divided by the Green Line. For ten points, name this island nation, controlled successively by the Ottomans and Great Britain, in the eastern Mediterranean.
Answer: Republic of Cyprus (or Kypriaki Dimokratia; or Kibris Cumhuriyeti

5399. Massive country which it controlled.
Answer: China (

5400. Resource-rich region of Northeast Asia where the Qing dynasty originated.
Answer: Manchuria (

5401. Two wars named for a narcotic, both victories for the British Empire over the Qing.
Answer: Opium Wars

5402. Last native dynasty destabilized by internal rebellion and overthrown by the Qing.
Answer: Ming Dynasty

5403. Last emperor of the Qing who was placed on the throne of the Japanese puppet state, Manchukuo [[MAN-CHOO-KWOH]].
Answer: Emperor Puyi (

5404. "Dowager Empress" who controlled the Qing government through the Hundred Days Reform and died in 1908.
Answer: Cixi [[SEE-SHEE]] (or Empress Dowager Cixi; or Cíxī Tàihòu)

5405. War the treaty officially ended.
Answer: World War One (or the First World War)

5406. Nation once led by Wilhelm [[VIHL-helm]] II that signed the treaty with the Allies.
Answer: Germany (

5407. Intergovernmental body and predecessor to the United Nations which was created at Versailles.
Answer: League of Nations (

5408. U.S. president who attended the Treaty of Versailles, forming the Big Three with David Lloyd George and Georges Clemenceau [[cleh-mehn-SOH]].
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

5409. Earlier treaty signed by Germany with Soviet Russia, overturned at Versailles.
Answer: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk

5410. International free city set up next to the Polish Corridor.
Answer: Danzig (or Gdańsk)

5411. Empire whose conquistador Hernán Cortés collapsed the Aztec empire.
Answer: Kingdom of Spain (or Reino de España (

5412. Final major emperor of the Aztecs, who may have been killed by a rock thrown by his own subject.
Answer: Moctezuma II (

5413. Capital city, later the site of Mexico City, which was built on an island within Lake Texcoco.
Answer: Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohch-TEET-lahn]]

5414. Language spoken as a lingua franca in the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Nahuatl [[nah-HWAH-teel]]

5415. "Great Temple" dedicated to the bloody war god Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-see-loh- "POACH"-tlee]], where many sacrifices were performed.
Answer: Templo Mayor (

5416. Ritual wars fought between the Aztec and their tributaries to collect sacrifices for the gods.
Answer: Flowery Wars (or Xōchiyāōyōtl; or Guerra Florida)

5417. A ceremonial bronze example of one of these objects was found in the River Thames [[TEMZ]] near Battersea. The aspis type of these objects were also called (*) hoplons, and a squared version called a scuta was used by the Romans. These items, which use a strap called a guige [[GEEJ]], can be found in heater, kite, and tower (*) varieties. For ten points, name these pieces of armor held in the hand, historically used to protect from sword or spear strikes.
Answer: shield (

5418. The initial plans for the construction of this building were created by the Bethlehem Engineering Corporation which wanted to build an office complex at the site of a Waldorf-Astoria hotel. To complete this project, one of its investors, John J. Raskob, (+) obtained a $27.5 million loan from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company during the Great Depression. From 1931 to the completion of the World (*) Trade Center in 1970, this building held the title of "tallest in the world." For ten points, name this 102-story Art Deco skyscraper in midtown Manhattan.
Answer: Empire

5419. Near the end of his life, this man prepared the defense of Gibraltar after it was threatened by the Castilian king Alfonso XI [[the eleventh]]. This Berber's sixteen month hajj to Mecca continued as he joined a caravan aiming to trade within the Il- khanate. The (*) travelogue known informally as The Rihla recounts this man's visit to Yuan China, the Swahili Coast, and the Indian subcontinent. (*) For ten points, name this medieval Moroccan explorer who traveled over ten times as far as Marco Polo.
Answer: Ibn Battuta (

5420. A woman named Dorothy Householder was the lone fatality in a July 1974 bombing at this site. In 1952, the Kray twins were arrested after assaulting an officer at this location. Built on the order of William (+) the Conqueror, this building was where Edward V was kept after he was declared illegitimate. Sir Walter Raleigh was (*) imprisoned in this building that also held Anne Boleyn. For ten points, name this fortress and former prison that now houses Britain's Crown Jewels.
Answer: Tower of London (or Her Majesty's Royal Palace and Fortress of the Tower of London)

5421. Young Turk Enver Pasha ordered this city's "September Days," a series of anti- Armenian pogroms committed by the "Army of Islam." A part of the larger "Case Blue," Operation Edelweiss [[AY-del-vice]] (+) was a Wehrmacht [[VARE-mahkt]] advance meant to cripple the Soviet petroleum supply by capturing this city's (*) oilfields. For ten points, which Caspian port city was made capital of independent Azerbaijan following the dissolution of the USSR?
Answer: Baku (or Baki)

5422. At the end of this text, a man travels to reach a rainbow-colored Spindle of Necessity, where Ananke [[ah-NAHN-keh]], or Necessity, hands out tokens for a lottery. This text discusses a king of Lydia [[LIH-dee-ah]] who possessed a ring that grants (+) invisibility. The Myth of Er and Ring of Gyges [[GY-jeez]] appear in this text, which posits a group of men who confuse shadows on a wall for reality in its Allegory of the (*) Cave. Socrates speaks on the ideal "philosopher-king" who rules the state in, for ten points, what dialogue on government by Plato?
Answer: The Republic (or Politeia; or De Republica; or Plato's Republic)

5423. This figure was supposedly the ancestor of the Dorian invaders, including the Agiads [[ah-JEE-ids]] and Eurypontids [[yoo-rih-PON-tids]], whose dynasties co-ruled as kings of Sparta. One bust of this figure identifies him with the Emperor Commodus [[KAH-moh-duss]] (+), and a statue found in Mathura [[mah-THOO-rah]], India depicts this man slaying the Nemean [[neh-MEE-an]] (*) Lion. For ten points, name this performer of Twelve Labors from Greek mythology.
Answer: Heracles (

5424. J.A. Wayland gave this work early exposure by publishing it serially in his socialist paper, Appeal to Reason. This work, which aimed to unveil poor working conditions in Chicago, (+) led to its author claiming "[he] aimed at the public's heart and by accident [he] hit it in the stomach." The passage of the Pure (*) Food and Drug Act was partially motivated by, for ten points, which muckraking exposé of the meatpacking industry written by Upton Sinclair?
Answer: The Jungle

5425. In his treatise, Thoughts on Government, this man wrote that “Politics is the Science of human happiness.” As a member of the Second Continental Congress, this man predicted that American independence (+) would be celebrated on July 2nd. As a lawyer, this man successfully defended Thomas Preston and the other British soldiers who perpetrated (*) the Boston Massacre. For ten points, name this Massachusetts statesman who also served as the first vice president and second president of the United States.
Answer: John Adams (do not

5426. The Soviet Union boycotted this event in favor of their own Spartakiad to be hosted in Barcelona the following year. The reporters of Der Stürmer [[SHTIR-muh]] were banned from the host city during this procession. Prior to this event, Adidas founder Adolf Dassler convinced Jesse Owens to wear his shoes prior to the Long Jump competition. For ten points, name this 1936 athletic event hosted by the government of Adolf Hitler in the German capital.
Answer: Berlin Olympics (

5427. This man's work on animal respiration utilized his friend and human guinea pig Armand Séguin [[seh-GWEEN]]. This scientist disproved the historically popular phlogiston [[FLOH-jis-tahn]] theory by showing that nothing new is produced by combustion. This man formulated the law of conservation of mass and named oxygen and hydrogen before being executed during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this French scientist who is considered the father of modern chemistry.
Answer: Antoine Lavoisier (or Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier)

5428. A follower of the priest Iliodor [[ill-YOH-dor]] attempted to assassinate this man by stabbing him in the stomach. Another attempted assassination of this man involved feeding him cyanide-laced cake before he was finally killed with a bullet to the head by Felix Yusupov. This holy man claimed to have cured Alexei Romanov of hemophilia. For ten points, name this Russian mystic whose influence grew due to his closeness with Empress Alexandra.
Answer: Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin

5429. The Romano-British syncretized this deity with the Celtic figure Sulis, forming a duo who protected over the thermal waters of Bath. This goddess, whom the Etruscans showed uncharacteristically hurling lightning bolts, was often depicted in fresco reliefs with a lowered sword as opposed to her more vicious parallel, Mars. For ten points, which Roman goddess of wisdom and war's Greek analogue is Athena?
Answer: Minerva (

5430. Over 300 eunuchs and maids died in this city's Old Summer Palace following its intentional burning by the British under Lord Elgin. Prince Gong signed an 1860 treaty named for this city, ceding parts of Manchuria to Russia and leasing Kowloon to Britain. Following the Northern Expedition, central authority was moved south from this city to Nanjing. The Forbidden City is located in, for ten points, what modern capital of China?
Answer: Beijing (or Beiping

5431. In Islamic tradition, this figure will kill the malevolent ad-Dajjal [[ahd-dah-JAHL]] and both Gog and Magog during the Second Coming. The Cathedral of Turin houses a shroud supposedly bearing the face of this man, whose execution apparatus was split into several pieces that are considered relics in the Christian church. For ten points, name this holy figure who was executed under Roman law in Judea, being nailed to the True Cross.
Answer: Jesus Christ (

5432. A congratulatory email sent to this man was allegedly one of only two emails sent by Bill Clinton during his presidency. Though not John McCain, this man’s acceptance of a $200,000 loan made him a member of the Keating Five. A record three-and-a-half hour flight from L.A. to New York was conducted by this man before being chosen as a member of the Mercury Seven. The lone occupant on a five-hour flight in 1962 aboard Friendship 7, for ten points, who was this astronaut, the first American to orbit the Earth?
Answer: John Glenn (or John Herschel Glenn Jr.)

5433. In his treatise, Thoughts on Government, this man wrote that “Politics is the Science of human happiness.” As a member of the Second Continental Congress, this man predicted that American independence would be celebrated on July 2nd. As a lawyer, this man successfully defended Thomas Preston and the other British soldiers who perpetrated the Boston Massacre. For ten points, name this Massachusetts statesman who also served as the first vice president and second president of the United States.
Answer: John Adams (do not

5434. Near the Syr Darya, this empire's forces burned their entire baggage train during the "Day of Thirst" while being harassed by the Turgesh Khanate. Forces of this dynasty's Yazid I killed Husayn ibn Ali to win the Battle of Karbala, sparking the Second Fitna. This dynasty fled to Iberia after being overthrown by the Abbasid dynasty. For ten points, name this successor of the "Rightly Guided" caliphs, an empire which conquered much of North Africa and Western Asia.
Answer: Umayyad Caliphate (

5435. Though Milton Obote [[oh-BOH-teh]] was restored to this country's presidency after a brief war with Tanzania, he did not restore its traditional kingdoms such as Ankole [[ahn- KOH-leh]]. Obote's predecessor proclaimed himself Conqueror of the British Empire and expelled this country's Asian population while declaring himself King of Scotland. During that dictator's rule, Israel rescued over 100 hostages from this country in Operation Entebbe [[en- TEH-beh]]. For ten points, name this country, once ruled by Idi Amin.
Answer: Republic of Uganda

5436. In 2021, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of two people of this profession who argued workers could not unionize on their property. After the U.S. Civil War, people of this profession formed the Grange advocacy group. Thomas Jefferson called people with this profession "the chosen people of God," and this profession was one of the most severely affected by the Dust Bowl. For ten points, name this profession involved in growing crops and raising animals for consumption.
Answer: Farmers (

5437. One account of this conflict ends at the Battle of Ascalon, where Godfrey of Bouillon [[boo-YOHN]] drove off the army of the Fatimids. Seljuk leader Kilij [[kee-LEEJ]] Arslan's lightly armored horse archers were defeated in this conflict by a combined Italo-Norman force at Dorylaeum [[DOR-ee-LAY-uhm]]. A Byzantine request for aid led to, for ten points, what 11th century war to recapture of the Holy Land from Muslim control?
Answer: First Crusade (

5438. This country's first president, Guadalupe Victoria, was among only a few of its early leaders to complete a full term. One president of this nation engineered an eighth term as president in 1910, leading to his overthrow by Francisco Madero and a ten-year civil war. Benito Juárez [[HWAH-rehz]] governed this country, but was overthrown by an Austrian archduke. Emperor Maximilian was executed after failing to conquer, for ten points, what country where Cinco de Mayo commemorates a victory over France?
Answer: Mexico (

5439. John Boehner [[BAY-ner]] resigned from this position in 2015 following a speech from Pope Francis the day prior. This position is second in the U.S. line of succession following the vice president. The current holder of this position represents the 12th District of California and went viral for a GIF of her clapping at Donald Trump in 2019. For ten points, name this elected leader of the lower chamber of the U.S. Congress, which is currently held by Nancy Pelosi.
Answer: Speaker of the House of Representatives BONUS: The First Speaker of the House was Frederick Muhlenberg, whose inaccurate "legend" claims that he stopped what European language from becoming the official tongue of the United

5440. During the 1904 Olympic iteration of one of these events in St. Louis, Cuban mailman Andarín Carvajal [[kar-vah-HAHL]] took a nap after breaking a forty hour fast by eating rotten apples. The Chechen-descended Tsarnaev [[zar-"NIGH"-yef]] brothers targeted the 2013 Boston iteration of these sporting events by using homemade bombs. The legendary run of Pheidippides [[fy-DIH-peh-deez]] from a battle site to Athens inspired, for ten points, what long-distance running events?
Answer: Marathons (

5441. This island attempted to secede from one country after the "Grito de Lares" [[GREE- toh deh LAH-rehs]]. This non-Cuban island was controlled by the Spanish since the defeat of the native Taíno [[tah-EE-noh]] by Juan Ponce de León, who became this island's first governor. This island became a "Commonwealth" in 1952, and movements for full integration and independence have competed since then. For ten points, name this Caribbean territory of the United States, a potential 51st state.
Answer: Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (

5442. This region's eastern part was split off as the Union Territory of Ladakh, and its northernmost frontiers, far from its capital Srinagar, are governed as Gilgit-Baltistan [[GIL- git BAHL-tee-stahn]]. This region's inhabitants were separated after a 1947 war that reflected tensions between its Maharaja Hari Singh and this region's majority-Muslim population. With a Line of Control between two parts of this region ending at the Siachen [[see-AH-chen]] Glacier, for ten points, what is this region which is disputed by India and Pakistan?
Answer: Kashmir (

5443. This country's 1960 independence was established by the London and Zürich Agreements. One leader of this country survived four assassination attempts and was given the title "Ethnarch." This country, whose first president was Makarios III [[mah-KAHR-yohss the THIRD]], pursued a union with a larger country in a process called Enosis [[ee-NOH-siss]]. This country's north has been occupied since 1973 by Turkey and is divided by the Green Line. For ten points, name this island nation, controlled successively by the Ottomans and Great Britain, in the eastern Mediterranean.
Answer: Republic of Cyprus (or Kypriaki Dimokratia; or Kibris Cumhuriyeti

5444. Massive country which it controlled.
Answer: China (

5445. Resource-rich region of Northeast Asia where the Qing dynasty originated.
Answer: Manchuria (

5446. Two wars named for a narcotic, both victories for the British Empire over the Qing.
Answer: Opium Wars

5447. Last native dynasty destabilized by internal rebellion and overthrown by the Qing.
Answer: Ming Dynasty

5448. Last emperor of the Qing who was placed on the throne of the Japanese puppet state, Manchukuo [[MAN-CHOO-KWOH]].
Answer: Emperor Puyi (

5449. Rebellion launched by civil servant Hong Xiuquan [[SHOO-CHWAN]], who attempted to found a Heavenly Kingdom.
Answer: Taiping Rebellion (or Taiping Civil War; or Taiping Revolution)

5450. "Dowager Empress" who controlled the Qing government through the Hundred Days Reform and died in 1908.
Answer: Cixi [[SEE-SHEE]] (or Empress Dowager Cixi; or Cíxī Tàihòu)

5451. 1911 Revolution that collapsed Qing rule, resulting in the disastrous rise of Yuan Shikai.
Answer: Xinhai Revolution

5452. War the treaty officially ended.
Answer: World War One (or the First World War)

5453. Nation once led by Wilhelm [[VIHL-helm]] II that signed the treaty with the Allies.
Answer: Germany (

5454. Intergovernmental body and predecessor to the United Nations which was created at Versailles.
Answer: League of Nations (

5455. U.S. president who attended the Treaty of Versailles, forming the Big Three with David Lloyd George and Georges Clemenceau [[cleh-mehn-SOH]].
Answer: Woodrow Wilson (or Thomas Woodrow Wilson)

5456. Earlier treaty signed by Germany with Soviet Russia, overturned at Versailles.
Answer: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk

5457. International free city set up next to the Polish Corridor.
Answer: Danzig (or Gdańsk)

5458. Country that received the port of Qingdao [[CHING-DOW]] in the treaty, triggering the May 4th Movement in another country.
Answer: Empire of Japan (or Nippon)

5459. Region of western Germany separated by the treaty and made a League of Nations mandate until 1935.
Answer: Saarland

5460. Empire whose conquistador Hernán Cortés collapsed the Aztec empire.
Answer: Kingdom of Spain (or Reino de España (

5461. Final major emperor of the Aztecs, who may have been killed by a rock thrown by his own subject.
Answer: Moctezuma II (

5462. Capital city, later the site of Mexico City, which was built on an island within Lake Texcoco.
Answer: Tenochtitlan [[teh-nohch-TEET-lahn]]

5463. Language spoken as a lingua franca in the Aztec Empire.
Answer: Nahuatl [[nah-HWAH-teel]]

5464. "Great Temple" dedicated to the bloody war god Huitzilopochtli [[hweet-see-loh- "POACH"-tlee]], where many sacrifices were performed.
Answer: Templo Mayor (

5465. Ritual wars fought between the Aztec and their tributaries to collect sacrifices for the gods.
Answer: Flowery Wars (or Xōchiyāōyōtl; or Guerra Florida)

5466. Agricultural innovation used to grow crops on the shallow beds of bodies of water.
Answer: Chinampas

5467. Aztec term for city-states that retained local leaders but swore fealty to the emperor.
Answer: Altepetl [[ahl-teh-PEH-tul]]

5468. The negotiation of the Suez Crisis was done by a diplomat from this political party, Lester Pearson. The Shawinigan [[shah-WEH-neh-gehn]] (+) Handshake, which was a chokehold against a protestor by a leader of this party, occurred during anti- poverty protests in Gatineau [[gah-tee-NOW]], Quebec. Pierre and Justin (*) Trudeau both served as leaders of, for ten points, which Canadian political party, the traditional opponents of the Conservatives?
Answer: Liberal Party of Canada (

5469. The initial plans for the construction of this building were created by the Bethlehem Engineering Corporation which wanted to build an office complex at the site of a Waldorf-Astoria hotel. To complete this project, one of its investors, John J. Raskob, (+) obtained a $27.5 million loan from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company during the Great Depression. From 1931 to the completion of the World (*) Trade Center in 1970, this building held the title of "tallest in the world." For ten points, name this 102-story Art Deco skyscraper in midtown Manhattan.
Answer: Empire

5470. Near the end of his life, this man prepared the defense of Gibraltar after it was threatened by the Castilian king Alfonso XI [[the eleventh]]. This Berber's sixteen month hajj to Mecca continued as he joined a caravan aiming to trade within the Il- khanate. The (*) travelogue known informally as The Rihla recounts this man's visit to Yuan China, the Swahili Coast, and the Indian subcontinent. (*) For ten points, name this medieval Moroccan explorer who traveled over ten times as far as Marco Polo.
Answer: Ibn Battuta (

5471. A woman named Dorothy Householder was the lone fatality in a July 1974 bombing at this site. In 1952, the Kray twins were arrested after assaulting an officer at this location. Built on the order of William (+) the Conqueror, this building was where Edward V was kept after he was declared illegitimate. Sir Walter Raleigh was (*) imprisoned in this building that also held Anne Boleyn. For ten points, name this fortress and former prison that now houses Britain's Crown Jewels.
Answer: Tower of London (or Her Majesty's Royal Palace and Fortress of the Tower of London)

5472. Young Turk Enver Pasha ordered this city's "September Days," a series of anti- Armenian pogroms committed by the "Army of Islam." A part of the larger "Case Blue," Operation Edelweiss [[AY-del-vice]] (+) was a Wehrmacht [[VARE-mahkt]] advance meant to cripple the Soviet petroleum supply by capturing this city's (*) oilfields. For ten points, which Caspian port city was made capital of independent Azerbaijan following the dissolution of the USSR?
Answer: Baku (or Baki)

5473. At the end of this text, a man travels to reach a rainbow-colored Spindle of Necessity, where Ananke [[ah-NAHN-keh]], or Necessity, hands out tokens for a lottery. This text discusses a king of Lydia [[LIH-dee-ah]] who possessed a ring that grants (+) invisibility. The Myth of Er and Ring of Gyges [[GY-jeez]] appear in this text, which posits a group of men who confuse shadows on a wall for reality in its Allegory of the (*) Cave. Socrates speaks on the ideal "philosopher-king" who rules the state in, for ten points, what dialogue on government by Plato?
Answer: The Republic (or Politeia; or De Republica; or Plato's Republic)

5474. This figure was supposedly the ancestor of the Dorian invaders, including the Agiads [[ah-JEE-ids]] and Eurypontids [[yoo-rih-PON-tids]], whose dynasties co-ruled as kings of Sparta. The legendary progenitor of those dynasties, Hyllus [[HEE-lus]], was this man's son by Deianira [[dy-ah-NEE-rah]]. (+) One bust of this figure identifies him with the Emperor Commodus [[KAH-moh-duss]], and a statue found in Mathura [[mah- THOO-rah]], India depicts this man slaying the Nemean [[neh-MEE-an]] (*) Lion. For ten points, name this performer of Twelve Labors from Greek mythology.
Answer: Heracles (

5475. J.A. Wayland gave this work early exposure by publishing it serially in his socialist paper, Appeal to Reason. This work, which aimed to unveil poor working conditions in Chicago, (+) led to its author claiming "[he] aimed at the public's heart and by accident [he] hit it in the stomach." The passage of the Pure (*) Food and Drug Act was partially motivated by, for ten points, which muckraking exposé of the meatpacking industry written by Upton Sinclair?
Answer: The Jungle

5476. A ceremonial bronze example of one of these objects was found in the River Thames [[TEMZ]] near Battersea. The aspis type of these objects were also called (*) hoplons, and a squared version called a scuta was used by the Romans. These items, which use a strap called a guige [[GEEJ]], can be found in heater, kite, and tower (*) varieties. For ten points, name these pieces of armor held in the hand, historically used to protect from sword or spear strikes.
Answer: shield (

5477. Because Septimius Severus was born in Leptis Magna, a former colony of this city, he gave all of its people Roman citizenship at the end of the 2nd Century. Alexander the Great crucified 2,000 survivors in this city after he built an artificial causeway to subjugate its island portion. This city names a type of purple dye from the murex snail, most commonly associated with imperial power in antiquity. For ten points, name this Phoenician metropolis in modern- day Lebanon.
Answer: Tyre (

5478. As punishment for smoking, Deccan [[DEH-kan]] sultan Malik Ambar poured this substance into the ears and mouths of criminals. This substance's presence in Roman toys and plumbing has been speculated as a cause of the fall of the Roman Empire due to widespread impotence and ill health effects. For ten points, name this toxic metal symbolized Pb.
Answer: Lead (

5479. During a performance in this country of the ballet Spartacus by Aram Khachaturian [[kah-chah-TOO-ree-ahn]], Leonid Yakobson [[YAH-kohb-sun]] abandoned the traditional pointe technique during a performance at the Bolshoi Theatre. Ethnically Polish dancer Vaslav Nijinsky [[nih-JIN-skee]] helped popularize a ballet company named for this nation originally founded by Sergei Diaghilev [[dee-AH-geh-lef]]. Unrest occurred during the ballet The Rite of Spring, composed by, for ten points, what nation's composer, Igor Stravinsky?
Answer: Russia (

5480. Pinaka and Shiranga are this type of weapon in Hindu myth, in which Arjuna [[ar-JOO- nah]] also fights with one of these weapons made by Brahma called Gandiva [[gahn-DEE- vah]]. Hou Yi [[HOH-YEE]] uses one of these weapons in Chinese myth to eliminate nine of the ten suns. The constellation Sagittarius is named after Chiron's [[KY-rons]] role in teaching the use of these weapons to Achilles. For ten points, name this ranged weapon often featured in mythology.
Answer: Bow and Arrows

5481. Thomas Young helped decipher this writing system by identifying that cartouches [[kar-TOO-shes]] were used to enclose royal names. Jean-François Champollion [[shahm- pohl-YOHN]] deciphered this script using an object which depicted a decree in this system as well as Ancient Greek. The Rosetta Stone helped decipher, for ten points, what pictographic writing system of Ancient Egypt?
Answer: Egyptian Hieroglyphs (or Hieroglyphics)

5482. In an effort to map this river in the 19th century, Breton explorer Auguste Pavie [[pah- VEE]] led a namesake mission with a convoy of elephants. During the first days of the Tet Offensive, the Vietcong attempted to seize all major towns in South Vietnam along this river. Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam formed a commission to maintain the natural integrity of, for ten points, what river of Southeast Asia?
Answer: Mekong River (

5483. A victim of one of these attacks attempted to fold one thousand origami cranes to rid herself of a perpetual illness caused by one of these events, the orders for which were transmitted by General Thomas T. Handy. The Flying Fortress Enola Gay dropped a payload known as the "Little Boy" during the first of these events. For ten points, name these attacks by the United States on Japan, the only recorded nuclear bombings in history.
Answer: Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (

5484. A passive walkout-turned-uprising in one of these places in Vorkuta [[vor-KOO-tah]] occurred in response to a mass influx of Ukrainians and the arrest of the repressive NKVD head Lavrentiy Beria [[law-REN-tee BEH-ree-ah]]. The Khrushchev Thaw led to the rehabilitation of many prisoners held in these camps first created by Lenin during the Russian Civil War. Many of the political opponents of the Great Purge were sent to, for ten points, what Soviet forced labor camps prominent in the Stalinist period?
Answer: Gulags (

5485. During this war, the USFA encouraged “Meatless Mondays.” The Sedition Act passed during this war caused Eugene V. Debs to be jailed for encouraging draft-dodging. A president urged the U.S to enter this war to “make the world safe for democracy.” For ten points, name this war in which the United States sent "doughboys" to fight in the trenches.
Answer: World War One (or the First World War

5486. It's not Portugal, but The Lusiads inspired this nation's opera L'Africaine [[lah-free- KEHN]], about the historical Vasco da Gama. The composer of The Carnival of the Animals was from this nation, as was the composer of Clair de Lune. For ten points, name this European nation, home to composers like Camille Saint-Saëns [[kah-MEEL san-SAHN]] and Claude Debussy [[klohd deh-byoo-SEE]].
Answer: France (

5487. A peasant rebellion in this nation led by Skipper Clement was put down by the noble Johan Rantzau [[RAHNT-zow]] during the Count's Feud. Håkon VI [[HAH-kohn the SIXTH]] of Norway married this kingdom's Queen Margaret, leading to the formation of the Kalmar Union. The German Empire seized this country's province of Schleswig [[SHLESS-vig]] in a brief 19th century conflict. For ten points, name this Scandinavian nation that once governed Sweden and Norway from its capital, Copenhagen.
Answer: Kingdom of Denmark (or Kongeriget Danmark

5488. This oratorio was based on a text compiled from the Coverdale Psalter and King James Bible by Charles Jennens. Part one of this oratorio depicts the salvation of Isaiah, and that scene in this work is punctuated by And the Glory of the Lord. A popular legend states that George II began the tradition of standing during this piece's Hallelujah Chorus. For ten points, name this oratorio often performed at Christmas, written by George Frideric Handel.
Answer: Messiah BONUS: Although he often performed in London, Handel's Messiah debuted on this island, which had been controlled by the English since

5489. This group intentionally sparked the Regina [[ruh-JY-nah]] Riots in an attempt to crush a mass protest of unemployed men. One of this group's most notable accomplishments was capturing stagecoach robber Bill Miner. The nickname of this group derives from their now-defunct standard of riding horses. For ten points, name this police force that is responsible for civil control in Canada.
Answer: Mounties (

5490. This man established a short-lived Government-in-exile known as the Sigmaringen Enclave. During one conflict, this man's defensive strategy prevented mass mutinies following the disastrous Nivelle Offensive against Imperial Germany. A cabinet led by this man formally surrendered to Nazi Germany during the Peace at Compiègne [[cohm-pee- EHN]] following a 1940 blitzkrieg. For ten points, name this Marshal of France who led the collaborationist Vichy Regime.
Answer: Philippe Pétain [[PEH-tahn]] (or Henri Philippe Benoni Omer Pétain

5491. A poet from this nation named Pulci [[POOL-chee]] retells an account of Charlemagne’s paladins, Roland [[roh-LAHND]] and Renauld [[reh-NOHD]] who convert the title Morgante [[mor-GAHN-teh]] to Christianity. William of Baskerville solves a murder in a Benedictine monastery in this country in The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco [[EH-koh]]. Cesare Borgia's [[CHEH-zeh-reh BOR-zhahs]] military exploits inspired Niccolo Machiavelli to write The Prince, in, for ten points, what is now what country?
Answer: Italy (

5492. England's first ambassador to this nation, Thomas Roe, failed to gain special trading privileges in Surat [[soo-RAHT]]. The Afghani Sur Empire temporarily usurped control from this country until the regent Hemu [[HEE-moo]] lost the Second Battle of Panipat [[PAN-ee- pat]]. The rulers of this empire claimed direct descent from Tamerlane, and under Aurangzeb [[oh-RAHNG-zehb]] this empire conquered much of the Deccan [[DEH-kan]] Plateau. Shah Jahan and Akbar ruled, for ten points, what Muslim empire of the Indian subcontinent?
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Mughals

5493. Capital which takes its name from the combination of two Medieval cities.
Answer: Budapest

5494. Neighbor once led by the Habsburgs, which formed a dual monarchy in 1867.
Answer: Austria (

5495. Olympic aquatic sport whose 1956 semifinals match turned bloody due to tensions with the USSR.
Answer: Water polo

5496. Saint who was crowned first King of Hungary in the year 1000.
Answer: Stephen I (

5497. Mixed form of communism practiced in Hungary by János Kádár [[YAH-nohsh KAH- dahr]].
Answer: "Goulash Communism" (

5498. Holy city whose capture led to the call for the Third Crusade.
Answer: Jerusalem

5499. "Lion-Hearted" king who led the English after the death of his father, Henry II.
Answer: King Richard I

5500. Kurdish sultan whose conquests prompted the late 12th century Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (

5501. Ismaili sect and anti-Crusader faction in Syria who now names the English term for a "trained killer."
Answer: Assassins (

5502. German emperor who drowned in a river while heading to fight the Sultanate of Rum.
Answer: Frederick Barbarossa (

5503. Port whose successful siege by Guy [[GEE]] of Jerusalem allowed the Crusaders to launch incursions into the Holy Land.
Answer: Acre [[AH-creh]]

5504. City that contained the Pharos, or Great Lighthouse, and a massive library.
Answer: Alexandria (

5505. City on the Tigris and Euphrates that possessed a legendary Hanging Garden.
Answer: Babylon (or Bābilim)

5506. Type of elaborate wonder built at Halicarnassus and named for a wealthy Satrap.
Answer: Mausoleum at Halicarnassus (

5507. Anatolian city where the Temple of Artemis was housed.
Answer: Ephesus (

5508. Ancient Hebrew king who supposedly built the First Temple in Jerusalem.
Answer: Solomon

5509. Capital of the Nabataeans [[nah-buh-TAY-ens]] built into a desert mountain in Jordan.
Answer: Petra (

5510. Jerome Connor created a tribute to the more than 600 nuns who nursed soldiers during this conflict. The only woman to ever receive the Medal of Honor, Mary Walker, served as a surgeon during this war (+), as did the founder of the American Red Cross and "Angel of the Battlefield," (*) Clara Barton. For ten points, name this war, during which Belle Boyd provided valuable information to Stonewall Jackson.
Answer: United

5511. "Mad Jack" Churchill entered battle carrying one of these instruments, using it to signal attack orders to his fellow commandos during operations. James Reid was executed for playing this instrument during the Battle of Culloden [[kuh-LAH-den]] in (+) the Jacobite [[JAK-oh-bite]] Rising. Contemporary historian George Buchanan reports that this aerophonic instrument replaced the trumpet in warfare during in the 1600s. The Highlanders (*) of Scotland introduced, for ten points, which woodwind instrument?
Answer: Bagpipes

5512. In 1979, the Wetzel [[VEHT-zull]] family escaped East Germany using one of these objects after years of planning. The first-ever intercontinental ranged weapon used this technology and was known as Fu-Go (+) by the Japanese. French brothers Joseph-Michel and Jacques-Étienne Montgolfier [[mohnt-gahl-FYEH]] undertook the first manned flight of this technology, which was used for reconnaissance at the Battle of (*) Fleurus [[floo-ROO]]. For ten points, name these inflatable transports which Nadar used to take aerial photographs of Paris.
Answer: Hot-Air Balloon (

5513. A member of this dynasty secretly renounced the throne in 1823, though a contingent of soldiers attempted to press his claim anyway, resulting in the Decembrist Revolt. In 1613 a zemsky sobor elected Michael (+) as the first ruler from this dynasty, ending the Time of Troubles. This house's last tsar was executed alongside his entire family in 1918 (*) by Bolshevik soldiers. For ten points, name this long-time ruling house of the Russian empire.
Answer: Romanov (or Romanovy; or Romanovs)

5514. Myths about this location were discredited by Frantz Funck-Brentano [[foonk- bren-TAH-noh]]. A large plaster elephant was placed at this location by Napoleon, though it was replaced by the July Column. (+) Palloy the Patriot demolished this location, which was defended by Bernard Rene de Launay [[reh-neh-duh-law-NAY]] alongside the Swiss Guard who were cut down by a (*) mob. For ten points, name this Parisian fortress and prison destroyed at the beginning of the French Revolution.
Answer: The Bastille Saint-Antoine

5515. The largest bronze example of this type of artwork depicts the controversial conquistador who committed a massacre of the Acoma Pueblo, Governor Juan de Oñate [[oh-NYAH-teh]]. One sculpture of this type known as the "Quadriga," (*) depicting a vehicle driven by the Goddess of Victory, tops the Brandenburg Gate. Frederic Remington's Bronco Buster, a sculpture of this type, depicts a (*) cowboy of the Old West. Ancient Greece's Rampin Rider is an early example of, for ten points, what type of statue?
Answer: Equestrian Statue (

5516. Fears of this person's influence led people to believe that Black men would knock down white women on this person's "Tuesdays." Pauli Murray and this person worked to appeal for Odell Waller, though he was still executed in Virginia. Mary (+) McLeod Bethune and this person often walked arm-in-arm. This woman resigned from the Daughters of the American Revolution after Marian (*) Anderson was not allowed to sing in Constitution Hall. For ten points, name this Depression-era First Lady.
Answer: Eleanor Roosevelt (or Anna Eleanor Roosevelt)

5517. A character in this novel, based on a historical warlord also known as Xuande [[SHWAHN-DEH]], throws his infant son to the ground after General Zhao Yun [[ZHOW- YUN]] risks his life to save him during the Battle of (+) Changban [[CHAHNG-BAHN]]. The Battle of Red Cliffs appears in this novel which relates the campaigns of Cao Cao [[KOW-KOW]] (*) and Zhuge Liang [[TCHOO-guh LYAHNG]]. Luo Guanzhong [[LWOH GWAHN-ZHOHNG]] wrote, for ten points, what historical “Romance” set during a namesake period of Chinese history?
Answer: Romance of the Three Kingdoms (or Sānguó Yǎnyì)

5518. Despite being a Muslim beylik [[beh-"LICK"]], the flag of Karaman features a prominent blue one of these symbols on its official ensign. The first religious use of this symbol may be on the cover of the 11th century copies of the Tanakh. A (+) yellow one of these symbols was sewn onto the clothes of Jewish citizens in the Third Reich as a form of identification. The flag of (*) Israel depicts, for ten points, what six-sided shape named for the victor over the giant Goliath?
Answer: Star of David (or Magen David

5519. Because Septimius Severus was born in Leptis Magna, a former colony of this city, he gave all of its people Roman citizenship at the end of the 2nd Century. Alexander the Great crucified 2,000 survivors in this city after he built an artificial causeway to subjugate its island portion. This city names a type of purple dye from the murex snail, most commonly associated with imperial power in antiquity. For ten points, name this Phoenician metropolis in modern- day Lebanon.
Answer: Tyre (

5520. As punishment for smoking, Deccan [[DEH-kan]] sultan Malik Ambar poured this substance into the ears and mouths of criminals. The Piazza Fontana bombings occurred during a tumultuous time in Italian history known as the "Years of [this substance]." This substance's presence in Roman toys and plumbing has been speculated as a cause of the fall of the Roman Empire due to widespread impotence and ill health effects. For ten points, name this toxic metal symbolized Pb.
Answer: Lead (

5521. During a performance in this country of the ballet Spartacus by Aram Khachaturian [[kah-chah-TOO-ree-ahn]], Leonid Yakobson [[YAH-kohb-sun]] abandoned the traditional pointe technique during a performance at the Bolshoi Theatre. Ethnically Polish dancer Vaslav Nijinsky [[nih-JIN-skee]] helped popularize a ballet company named for this nation originally founded by Sergei Diaghilev [[dee-AH-geh-lef]]. Unrest occurred during the ballet The Rite of Spring, composed by, for ten points, what nation's composer, Igor Stravinsky?
Answer: Russia (

5522. Pinaka and Shiranga are this type of weapon in Hindu myth, in which Arjuna [[ar-JOO- nah]] also fights with one of these weapons made by Brahma called Gandiva [[gahn-DEE- vah]]. Hou Yi [[HOH-YEE]] uses one of these weapons in Chinese myth to eliminate nine of the ten suns. The constellation Sagittarius is named after Chiron's [[KY-rons]] role in teaching the use of these weapons to Achilles. Medieval tales abound with legends of users of these weapons from Sherwood Forest. For ten points, name this ranged weapon often featured in mythology.
Answer: Bow and Arrows

5523. Thomas Young helped decipher this writing system by identifying that cartouches [[kar-TOO-shes]] were used to enclose royal names. Demotic [[dee-MAH-tik]] was a simplified version of Hieratic [[hy-RAH-tik]] cursive, which derived from this writing system. Jean-François Champollion [[shahm-pohl-YOHN]] deciphered this script using an object which depicted a decree in this system as well as Ancient Greek. The Rosetta Stone helped decipher, for ten points, what pictographic writing system of Ancient Egypt?
Answer: Egyptian Hieroglyphs (or Hieroglyphics)

5524. In an effort to map this river in the 19th century, Breton explorer Auguste Pavie [[pah- VEE]] led a namesake mission with a convoy of elephants. During the first days of the Tet Offensive, the Vietcong attempted to seize all major towns in South Vietnam along this river. Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam formed a commission to maintain the natural integrity of, for ten points, what river of Southeast Asia?
Answer: Mekong River (

5525. Akbar the Great ordered a Persian language version of this work be produced known as the Razmnama [[rah-zem-NAH-mah]], which translates to "Book of War." In this work, a lengthy journey of exile to the Himalayas leads to the death of Draupadi. The Pandava and Kaurava families clash in this work's Kurukshetra War, following a failed peace conference led by Krishna. For ten points, name this Hindu epic written in Sanskrit which contains the Bhagavad Gita.
Answer: Mahabharata [[mah-hah-bah-RAH-tah]] (

5526. A victim of one of these attacks attempted to fold one thousand origami cranes to rid herself of a perpetual illness caused by one of these events, the orders for which were transmitted by General Thomas T. Handy. The Flying Fortress Enola Gay dropped a payload known as the "Little Boy" during the first of these events. For ten points, name these attacks by the United States on Japan, the only recorded nuclear bombings in history.
Answer: Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (

5527. To criticize a man holding this position, Buzz Windrip, Doremus Jessup uses the periodical The Vermont Vigilance in the Sinclair Lewis novel, It Can't Happen Here. Prior to the events of Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle, the successor of John Nance Garner, John W. Bricker, held this political position but failed to prevent an Axis occupation of North America. Phyllis Wheatley wrote "To his Excellency General Washington" about a holder of, for ten points, what executive position?
Answer: President of the United

5528. A passive walkout-turned-uprising in one of these places in Vorkuta [[vor-KOO-tah]] occurred in response to a mass influx of Ukrainians and the arrest of the repressive NKVD head Lavrentiy Beria [[law-REN-tee BEH-ree-ah]]. The Khrushchev Thaw led to the rehabilitation of many prisoners held in these camps first created by Lenin during the Russian Civil War. Many of the political opponents of the Great Purge were sent to, for ten points, what Soviet forced labor camps prominent in the Stalinist period?
Answer: Gulags (

5529. During this war, the Creel Committee sent out “four minute men” to encourage people to buy war bonds, and during this war, the USFA encouraged “Meatless Mondays.” The Sedition Act passed during this war caused Eugene V. Debs to be jailed for encouraging draft- dodging. A president urged the U.S to enter this war to “make the world safe for democracy.” For ten points, name this war in which the United States sent "doughboys" to fight in the trenches.
Answer: World War One (or the First World War

5530. It's not Portugal, but The Lusiads inspired this nation's opera L'Africaine [[lah-free- KEHN]], about the historical Vasco da Gama. A member of this nation's Les Six [[LEH SEE]] was inspired by the martyrdom of a convent of nuns to write his Dialogues of the Carmelites. The composer of The Carnival of the Animals was from this nation, as was the composer of Clair de Lune. For ten points, name this European nation, home to composers like Camille Saint-Saëns [[kah-MEEL san-SAHN]] and Claude Debussy [[klohd deh-byoo-SEE]].
Answer: France (

5531. A peasant rebellion in this nation led by Skipper Clement was put down by the noble Johan Rantzau [[RAHNT-zow]] during the Count's Feud. Håkon VI [[HAH-kohn the SIXTH]] of Norway married this kingdom's Queen Margaret, leading to the formation of the Kalmar Union. The German Empire seized this country's province of Schleswig [[SHLESS-vig]] in a brief 19th century conflict. For ten points, name this Scandinavian nation that once governed Sweden and Norway from its capital, Copenhagen.
Answer: Kingdom of Denmark (or Kongeriget Danmark

5532. This oratorio was based on a text compiled from the Coverdale Psalter and King James Bible by Charles Jennens. Part one of this oratorio depicts the salvation of Isaiah, and that scene in this work is punctuated by And the Glory of the Lord. A popular legend states that George II began the tradition of standing during this piece's Hallelujah Chorus. For ten points, name this oratorio often performed at Christmas, written by George Frideric Handel.
Answer: Messiah BONUS: Although he often performed in London, Handel's Messiah debuted on this island, which had been controlled by the English since

5533. This group intentionally sparked the Regina [[ruh-JY-nah]] Riots in an attempt to crush a mass protest of unemployed men. This group was able to successfully infiltrate the Communist Party of its nation, and one of this group's most notable accomplishments was capturing stagecoach robber Bill Miner. The nickname of this group derives from their now- defunct standard of riding horses. For ten points, name this police force that is responsible for civil control in Canada.
Answer: Mounties (

5534. This man established a short-lived Government-in-exile known as the Sigmaringen Enclave. During one conflict, this man's defensive strategy prevented mass mutinies following the disastrous Nivelle Offensive against Imperial Germany. A cabinet led by this man formally surrendered to Nazi Germany during the Peace at Compiègne [[cohm-pee- EHN]] following a 1940 blitzkrieg. For ten points, name this Marshal of France who led the collaborationist Vichy Regime.
Answer: Philippe Pétain [[PEH-tahn]] (or Henri Philippe Benoni Omer Pétain

5535. A poet from this nation named Pulci [[POOL-chee]] retells an account of Charlemagne’s paladins, Roland [[roh-LAHND]] and Renauld [[reh-NOHD]] who convert the title Morgante [[mor-GAHN-teh]] to Christianity. William of Baskerville solves a murder in a Benedictine monastery in this country in The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco [[EH-koh]]. Cesare Borgia's [[CHEH-zeh-reh BOR-zhahs]] military exploits inspired Niccolo Machiavelli to write The Prince, in, for ten points, what is now what country?
Answer: Italy (

5536. England's first ambassador to this nation, Thomas Roe, failed to gain special trading privileges in Surat [[soo-RAHT]]. The Afghani Sur Empire temporarily usurped control from this country until the regent Hemu [[HEE-moo]] lost the Second Battle of Panipat [[PAN-ee- pat]]. The rulers of this empire claimed direct descent from Tamerlane, and under Aurangzeb [[oh-RAHNG-zehb]] this empire conquered much of the Deccan [[DEH-kan]] Plateau. Shah Jahan and Akbar ruled, for ten points, what Muslim empire of the Indian subcontinent?
Answer: Mughal Empire (or Mughals

5537. Capital which takes its name from the combination of two Medieval cities.
Answer: Budapest

5538. Neighbor once led by the Habsburgs, which formed a dual monarchy in 1867.
Answer: Austria (

5539. Olympic aquatic sport whose 1956 semifinals match turned bloody due to tensions with the USSR.
Answer: Water polo

5540. Saint who was crowned first King of Hungary in the year 1000.
Answer: Stephen I (

5541. Admiral and reluctant Nazi collaborator who was overthrown and replaced by the Fascist Arrow Cross Party.
Answer: Miklós Horthy [[MEE-klohsh HOR-tee]] (or Nicholas Horthy; or Miklós Horthy de Nagybánya)

5542. Founder of Hungary who settled the Magyar [[MAH-gyar]] tribes in the Carpathian Basin.
Answer: Árpád

5543. Mixed form of communism practiced in Hungary by János Kádár [[YAH-nohsh KAH- dahr]].
Answer: "Goulash Communism" (

5544. Holy city whose capture led to the call for the Third Crusade.
Answer: Jerusalem

5545. "Lion-Hearted" king who led the English after the death of his father, Henry II.
Answer: King Richard I

5546. Kurdish sultan whose conquests prompted the late 12th century Crusade.
Answer: Saladin (

5547. Ismaili sect and anti-Crusader faction in Syria who now names the English term for a "trained killer."
Answer: Assassins (

5548. German emperor who drowned in a river while heading to fight the Sultanate of Rum.
Answer: Frederick Barbarossa (

5549. Port whose successful siege by Guy [[GEE]] of Jerusalem allowed the Crusaders to launch incursions into the Holy Land.
Answer: Acre [[AH-creh]]

5550. Twin-peaked volcano near which a Crusader army was destroyed, prompting the Third Crusade two years later.
Answer: Hattin (or Horns of Hattin

5551. City which names a treaty which recognized Muslim control of Jerusalem in exchange for safe Christian pilgrimage.
Answer: Treaty of Jaffa (

5552. City that contained the Pharos, or Great Lighthouse, and a massive library.
Answer: Alexandria (

5553. City on the Tigris and Euphrates that possessed a legendary Hanging Garden.
Answer: Babylon (or Bābilim)

5554. Type of elaborate wonder built at Halicarnassus and named for a wealthy Satrap.
Answer: Mausoleum at Halicarnassus (

5555. Anatolian city where the Temple of Artemis was housed.
Answer: Ephesus (

5556. Ancient Hebrew king who supposedly built the First Temple in Jerusalem.
Answer: Solomon

5557. Capital of the Nabataeans [[nah-buh-TAY-ens]] built into a desert mountain in Jordan.
Answer: Petra (

5558. Enormous Mahayana Buddhist temple in Central Java, Indonesia.
Answer: Borobudur (or Candi Borobudur)

5559. Second-century BC Buddhist cave system in Maharashtra that features surviving paintings from the period.
Answer: Ajanta Caves (or Buddhist Caves of Ajanta)

5560. Jerome Connor created a tribute to the more than 600 nuns who nursed soldiers during this conflict, and Loreta Janeta Velázquez likely masqueraded as a male soldier during this conflict. The only woman to ever receive the Medal of (+) Honor, Mary Walker, served as a surgeon during this war, as did the founder of the American Red Cross and "Angel of the Battlefield," (*) Clara Barton. For ten points, name this war, during which Belle Boyd provided valuable information to Stonewall Jackson.
Answer: United

5561. "Mad Jack" Churchill entered battle carrying one of these instruments, using it to signal attack orders to his fellow commandos during operations. James Reid was executed for playing this instrument during the Battle of Culloden [[kuh-LAH-den]] in (+) the Jacobite [[JAK-oh-bite]] Rising, with the British brandishing this instrument as a "weapon of war." Contemporary historian George Buchanan reports that this aerophonic instrument replaced the trumpet in warfare during in the 1600s. The Highlanders (*) of Scotland introduced, for ten points, which woodwind instrument?
Answer: Bagpipes

5562. In 1979, the Wetzel [[VEHT-zull]] family escaped East Germany using one of these objects after years of planning. The first-ever intercontinental ranged weapon used this technology and was known as Fu-Go (+) by the Japanese. French brothers Joseph-Michel and Jacques-Étienne Montgolfier [[mohnt-gahl-FYEH]] undertook the first manned flight of this technology, which was used for reconnaissance at the Battle of (*) Fleurus [[floo-ROO]]. For ten points, name these inflatable transports which Nadar used to take aerial photographs of Paris.
Answer: Hot-Air Balloon (

5563. Despite being a Muslim beylik [[beh-"LICK"]], the flag of Karaman features a prominent blue one of these symbols on its official ensign. The first religious use of this symbol may be on the cover of the 11th century copies of the Tanakh. A (+) yellow one of these symbols was sewn onto the clothes of Jewish citizens in the Third Reich as a form of identification. The flag of (*) Israel depicts, for ten points, what six-sided shape named for the victor over the giant Goliath?
Answer: Star of David (or Magen David

5564. Myths about this location were discredited by Frantz Funck-Brentano [[foonk- bren-TAH-noh]]. A large plaster elephant was placed at this location by Napoleon, though it was replaced by the July Column. (+) Palloy the Patriot demolished this location, which was defended by Bernard Rene de Launay [[reh-neh-duh-law-NAY]] alongside the Swiss Guard who were cut down by a (*) mob. For ten points, name this Parisian fortress and prison destroyed at the beginning of the French Revolution.
Answer: The Bastille Saint-Antoine

5565. The largest bronze example of this type of artwork depicts the controversial conquistador who committed a massacre of the Acoma Pueblo, Governor Juan de Oñate [[oh-NYAH-teh]]. One sculpture of this type known as the "Quadriga," (*) depicting a vehicle driven by the Goddess of Victory, tops the Brandenburg Gate. Frederic Remington's Bronco Buster, a sculpture of this type, depicts a (*) cowboy of the Old West. Ancient Greece's Rampin Rider is an early example of, for ten points, what type of statue?
Answer: Equestrian Statue (

5566. Fears of this person's influence led people to believe that Black men would knock down white women on this person's "Tuesdays." Pauli Murray and this person worked to appeal for Odell Waller, though he was still executed in Virginia. Mary (+) McLeod Bethune and this person often walked arm-in-arm. This woman resigned from the Daughters of the American Revolution after Marian (*) Anderson was not allowed to sing in Constitution Hall. For ten points, name this Depression-era First Lady.
Answer: Eleanor Roosevelt (or Anna Eleanor Roosevelt)

5567. A character in this novel, based on a historical warlord also known as Xuande [[SHWAHN-DEH]], throws his infant son to the ground after General Zhao Yun [[ZHOW- YUN]] risks his life to save him during the Battle of (+) Changban [[CHAHNG-BAHN]]. The Battle of Red Cliffs appears in this novel which relates the campaigns of Cao Cao [[KOW-KOW]] (*) and Zhuge Liang [[TCHOO-guh LYAHNG]]. Luo Guanzhong [[LWOH GWAHN-ZHOHNG]] wrote, for ten points, what historical “Romance” set during a namesake period of Chinese history?
Answer: Romance of the Three Kingdoms (or Sānguó Yǎnyì)

5568. A member of this dynasty secretly renounced the throne in 1823, though a contingent of soldiers attempted to press his claim anyway, resulting in the Decembrist Revolt. In 1613 a zemsky sobor elected Michael (+) as the first ruler from this dynasty, ending the Time of Troubles. This house's last tsar was executed alongside his entire family in 1918 (*) by Bolshevik soldiers. For ten points, name this long-time ruling house of the Russian empire.
Answer: Romanov (or Romanovy; or Romanovs) BONUS: This family of Welsh origin claimed the throne of England after Richard III was killed at the Battle of Bosworth Field. House of Tudor (or Tudors)

5569. The merger of the Sveno and the Bolshevik Workers Party into the Fatherland Front overthrew this nation's monarchy following a Soviet invasion. This European nation lost the Second Balkan War against its former allies of Serbia and Greece, losing territory in Macedonia and Thrace. Tsars such as Ferdinand I and Boris III led, for ten points, what member of the Axis governed from the city of Sofia?
Answer: Tsardom of Bulgaria (or Tsarstvo Balgariya

5570. A contingent of this European people populated the Haitian city of Cazale [[kah-SAL]] after they betrayed Napoleon's troops. Over 20,000 officers and other intelligentsia of these people were murdered by the NKVD in the Katyn [[kah-TEEN]] Forest Massacre. With Hungarian Michael Kovats [[KOH-vach]], a nobleman of this nationality named Casimir Pulaski [[poo-WAH-skee]] reformed the American Cavalry Corps. For ten points, name these people who's country was invaded on September 1, 1939 to begin World War Two.
Answer: Poles (or Polish People

5571. The Transnational Federal Government was formed in 2004 in this nation, which was led by Siad Barre [[SEE-add BAR-reh]] from 1969 until 1991. During the 2000s, this country was considered the home base of many pirates raiding shipping near the Gulf of Aden. For ten points, name this war-torn nation on the horn of Africa, once divided into British and Italian colonies.
Answer: Somalia (

5572. The melody from this piece was used as Rhodesia's National Anthem during the 1970s, and was also played for German Olympians during the Cold War. Today, this piece of music is used as the Anthem of Europe, and is the melody of the hymn Joyful, Joyful We Adore Thee. For ten points, name this piece of music, the finale of Beethoven's 9th Symphony.
Answer: Ode to Joy (

5573. At Thalamae [[THAL-ah-mee]], a cult center dedicated to a queen of this island named Pasiphaë [[PASS-if-fee]] was a pilgrimage site for travelers seeking an oracle. A king of this realm named Deucalion [[doo-KAY-lee-on]] was slain by the departing Theseus outside the gates of Knossos [[kuh-NAH-sus]], which was a major site of a Bronze Age civilization on this island. The Minoans once ruled, for ten points, what Aegean Island?
Answer: Crete (or Kriti)

5574. A toxic pool labeled for this blight is shown in a political cartoon where men labelled "Mr. Careless" and "Anti-Vaccinationist" fall off a cliff titled "Misinformation." During the Siege of Fort Pitt, Governor-General Jeffrey Amherst oversaw the gift of several blankets infected with this disease to opposing Native Americans. Edward Jenner inoculated people against, for ten points, what disease that was eradicated in the 1970s?
Answer: Smallpox (

5575. The site of this city was purchased from the Mississauga by Lord Dorchester. John Strachan negotiated this town's surrender to the Americans in the War of 1812, after which it was the site of Government House on two occasions before it was moved to another location. William Lyons Mackenzie was the first mayor of this city until he abandoned it to lead the Upper Canada Rebellion. The Canadian National Railway built the CN Tower in, for ten points, which Ontario metropolis?
Answer: Toronto (

5576. One ruler of this name became the last British monarch to lead an army in the field at the Battle of Dettingen [[deh-TIN-gehn]]. Robert Walpole became the first British prime minister under a ruler of this name after the South Sea Bubble burst. Another ruler of this name suffered from a mental illness believed to be porphyria [[por-"FEAR"-ee-ah]] and was king during the American Revolution. For ten points, give this name of four 18th and 19th- century British monarchs.
Answer: George (

5577. Though officially called the Revolutionary Nuns, a "Guard" nicknamed for this legendary culture served under Muammar Gaddafi of Libya. Strabo [[STRAY-boh]] claimed that these people lived along the Thermodon [[THER-moh-don]] River though they had retreated beyond the realm of the Gargareans [[gar-GAR-ee-ans]] with whom these people reproduced children. Legendarily led by Penthesilea [[pen-theh-sih-LAY-uh]] during the Attic War, for ten points, what was this culture of warrior women who may have lived in Scythia [[SIH-thee-ah]]?
Answer: Amazons (

5578. A biography of this ruler was written by Xenophon [[ZEE-noh-fohn]], who described this ruler being raised by a shepherd after his grandfather ordered him killed. According to Herodotus [[heh-ROD-oh-tus]], this king died fighting the Scythian queen Tomyris [[TOM-i- riss]]. A namesake cylinder celebrates this king’s defeat of the Babylonian king Nabonidus [[NAB-o-ni-dus]]. For ten points, name this ruler of the city of Anshan and founder of the Persian Empire.
Answer: Cyrus the Great (

5579. Mehdi Bazargan resigned to protest the beginning of this event, which concluded with the signing of the Algiers Accords. This crisis ended within minutes of the inauguration of Ronald Reagan as U.S. president, following a 444 day period of imprisonment for its victims. For ten points, identify this diplomatic crisis that began when revolutionary students stormed a U.S. embassy in a Middle Eastern capital.
Answer: Iran Hostage Crisis (

5580. A “Renaissance” among these people followed the overthrow of the Gutians [[GOO- tee-ans]]. The Stele [[STEE-lee]] of the Vultures commemorates the victory of Lagash [[LAY- gash]] over Umma, both cities founded by these people. Scenes of war and daily life are shown on the Standard of Ur, created by these people. These people were the first to build step- pyramid temples called ziggurats. For ten points, name this earliest civilization to spring up in Mesopotamia.
Answer: Sumerians BONUS: The Gutians initially overthrew the Akkadian Empire, which was founded by this conqueror. He is often considered the first "Emperor" in history. Sargon the Great (or Sargon of Akkad

5581. Due to an alleged prophecy given by Jan Hus [[YAHN HOOS]], this man is often depicted with a swan. This man was painted on several occasions by his friend and neighbor, Lucas Cranach [[KRAH-nahk]] the Elder, the court painter to the Elector of Saxony. For ten points, name this theologian and seminal figure in the Protestant Reformation who was often depicted in contemporary art.
Answer: Martin Luther BONUS: Hundreds of thousands of copies of Luther's Ninety-Five Theses were produced by this pioneering printer who developed the movable-type printing press. Johannes Gutenberg (or Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg)

5582. During this project, General Leslie Groves undertook a propaganda campaign to prevent "loose talk" by its participants. Despite his acts of treason, Klaus Fuchs [[FYOOKS]] was a key component on this project's development but later served nine years in prison for his actions. Because of his study and understanding of fast neutrons, Robert Oppenheimer was a prime member of this project. For ten points, name this top-secret U.S. project which developed the atomic bomb.
Answer: Manhattan Project (

5583. US army officer Henry Schneider revealed that this company provided a third of all trucks in the Wehrmacht through their Cologne plant which was confiscated in 1941. In the 1920s, this company attempted to set up a free state in Brazil in order to dodge the British monopoly on rubber. While not invented by this company's leader, the assembly line was popularized in the car factories of this company. For ten points, name this American based car company famous for its production of Model T's.
Answer: Ford Motor Company BONUS: While Detroit is known as the "Motor City", Ford's headquarters and the Henry Ford museum are located in what Michigan city, which was exposed in James M. Loewen's Sundown Towns for aggressively excluding Black migrants? Dearborn, Michigan Third Quarter The categories are:

5584. Was appointed to lead the Continental Army in the Revolutionary War.
Answer: George Washington

5585. Turned down the offer to lead Union troops to command the opposing Army of Northern Virginia instead.
Answer: Robert E(dward) Lee

5586. Was sent to Mexico in an attempt to capture the revolutionary Pancho Villa [[VEE- yah]].
Answer: John "Black Jack" Pershing (or John Joseph Pershing)

5587. Created the Anaconda Plan and served in the War of 1812 and the Mexican- American War.
Answer: Winfield Scott

5588. Was the last to achieve the rank of Five Star General, second in command to Eisenhower during the Liberation of France.
Answer: Omar Bradley (Omar Nelson Bradley)

5589. Century in which the Seven Years' War occurred.
Answer: 18th Century (

5590. English name for the North American theater of the Seven Years' War.
Answer: French and Indian War

5591. Treaty which ended the Seven Years' War which shares its name with the treaty which ended the Revolutionary War.
Answer: Treaty of Paris (

5592. City near the Plains of Abraham, where both James Wolfe and Louis Montcalm died.
Answer: Quebec City (or Ville de Québec)

5593. "Elder" British prime minister credited for most of the victories during the Annus Mirabilis [[meer-AH-bih-liss]].
Answer: William Pitt the Elder (do not

5594. Victorious general at Plassey who, with Warren Hastings, established British hegemony [[heh-JEH-moh-nee]] in India.
Answer: Robert Clive (

5595. Empire which he ruled.
Answer: Ottoman Empire (or Ottomans

5596. Austrian capital city he besieged in 1529.
Answer: Vienna (or Wien)

5597. Serbian capital he razed in 1521.
Answer: Belgrade (

5598. Island off the coast of Anatolia ruled by the Knights of St. John which he captured.
Answer: Rhodes (

5599. Persian dynasty against which he conducted a prolonged campaign and later negotiated the Peace of Amasya [[ah-MAH-syah]].
Answer: Safavid [[SAH-fah-vid]] Dynasty

5600. European kingdom which entered an "unholy" alliance with Suleiman.
Answer: Kingdom of France (or Royaume de France)

5601. Following the U.S. Invasion of Grenada, the Edward Seaga-led Labour Party won every seat in this nation's elections due to boycotts by the People's National Party. Back to Africa proponent Marcus (+) Garvey was from this island nation, which saw multiple "Maroon Wars" against the British government. The destruction of Port (*) Royal by a 17th-century earthquake led to the founding of, for ten points, which Caribbean nation's capital of Kingston?
Answer: Republic of Jamaica (or Jumieka)

5602. These people erected a namesake "Stele" [[STEE-lee]] in modern Xi'an [[SHEE- AHN]] written in both Chinese and Syriac. Two holy men of this faith supposedly smuggled silkworms out of China and brought them to the court of Justinian the Great. Hong (+) Xiuquan [[SHU-CHWAN]], the leader of the Taiping Rebellion, claimed to be the younger brother of this faith's (*) messiah. Matteo Ricci [[REE-chee]] visited China as a Jesuit missionary of, for ten points, which Abrahamic faith?
Answer: Chinese Christians (or Christianity

5603. Henry the Lion's "Artlenburger privilege" founded a predecessor of this organization called the Gotlander Cooperative. This organization had its trading privileges with England returned following the 15th century Treaty of (+) Utrecht. This dominant power of the Baltic and North Sea trade routes included cities like (*) Hamburg and Lübeck. For ten points, name this "League" of German cities, a maritime power of the late Middles Ages.
Answer: Hanseatic League (

5604. The crowning of Joseph Bonaparte led the First Junta [[HOON-tuh]] of this city to depose Viceroy Hidalgo de Cisneros [[sis-NEH-ros]] as part of the May Revolution. A women's movement in this city marched in support of those who "disappeared" during the (+) Dirty War. This city's Plaza de Mayo and Casa Rosada presidential palace were bombed by its own air force following a pro-Juan (*) Peron demonstration. The capital of the Viceroyalty of Rio de La Plata was, for ten points, what largest city in Argentina?
Answer: Buenos Aires (

5605. During this civilization’s archaic period, the Battle of Alalia allowed its expansion to the Tyrrhenian [[tih-REE-nyen]] Sea. According to legend, twelve cities from this ancient civilization formed an eponymous (+) league founded by Tachron [[TAH-kron]]. Alleged to have begun during the Iron Age with the Villanova (*) culture, for ten points, what kingdom in ancient Italy was assimilated into Roman society in a series of eponymous wars?
Answer: Etruscan civilization (or Rasenna; or Rasna

5606. The Ottoman Empire entered this conflict on the eventual losing side during the Pruth River Campaign. The Treaty of Nystad [[NEE-stad]] allowed the winning side of this war to seize the land to construct a new capital on the Gulf of (+) Finland. The Battle of Poltava [[pohl-TAH-vuh]] during this conflict ended an invasion of (*) Russia by King Charles XII [[the twelfth]]. For ten points, name this conflict where Russia under Peter the Great ended the golden age of the Swedish Empire.
Answer: Great Northern War

5607. A November 2021 prison riot in this nation's Litoral Penitentiary led to a call for a state of emergency by President Guillermo Lasso. Wikileaks founder Julian Assange (+) was given asylum in this nation's embassy by then-president Rafael Correa [[kor-REH-ah]]. Anti-Lenin Moreno riots led to a government relocation to (*) Guayaquil [["why"-YAH-keel]] in, for ten points, what Andean nation governed from Quito?
Answer: Republic of Ecuador (

5608. A region predominantly made of these geographical features called "Al-Ahsa" is known for producing high-quality bisht cloaks. One of these places, whose name translates to "Field of Trees," was the site of the Oracle of Amon (+), which confirmed Alexander the Great as Pharaoh of Egypt. The Tuareg confederations used these geographical features as waypoints (*) while on Trans-Saharan trade routes. Siwa in Egypt is an example of, for ten points, what fertile patches of land within deserts?
Answer: Oasis (or Oases

5609. This chemist's mentors included John Ericsson, designer of the U.S.'s first ironclad, and Ascanio Sobrero, the inventor of nitroglycerin. This man turned the once royally-owned iron production company Bofors into a cannon manufacturer. This man was denounced as a (+) war profiteer in an erroneous obituary, leading him to donate his estate to create several (*) namesake awards. For ten points, name this inventor of dynamite, who created a series of prizes awarded by a Swedish foundation.
Answer: Alfred Nobel (or Alfred Bernhard Nobel

5610. The merger of the Sveno and the Bolshevik Workers Party into the Fatherland Front overthrew this nation's monarchy following a Soviet invasion. This European nation lost the Second Balkan War against its former allies of Serbia and Greece, losing territory in Macedonia and Thrace. Tsars such as Ferdinand I and Boris III led, for ten points, what member of the Axis governed from the city of Sofia?
Answer: Tsardom of Bulgaria (or Tsarstvo Balgariya

5611. A contingent of this European people populated the Haitian city of Cazale [[kah-SAL]] after they betrayed Napoleon's troops. Over 20,000 officers and other intelligentsia of these people were murdered by the NKVD in the Katyn [[kah-TEEN]] Forest Massacre. With Hungarian Michael Kovats [[KOH-vach]], a nobleman of this nationality named Casimir Pulaski [[poo-WAH-skee]] reformed the American Cavalry Corps. For ten points, name these people who's country was invaded on September 1, 1939 to begin World War Two.
Answer: Poles (or Polish People

5612. The Transnational Federal Government was formed in 2004 in this nation, which was led by Siad Barre [[SEE-add BAR-reh]] from 1969 until 1991. An American response to civil war in this nation turned disastrous when two Black Hawk helicopters were shot down. During the 2000s, this country was considered the home base of many pirates raiding shipping near the Gulf of Aden. For ten points, name this war-torn nation on the horn of Africa, once divided into British and Italian colonies.
Answer: Somalia (

5613. The melody from this piece was used as Rhodesia's National Anthem during the 1970s, and was also played for German Olympians during the Cold War. Johannes Brahms quoted this melody in one of his symphonies, and the original composer borrowed the lyrics from a Friedrich Schiller poem. Today, this piece of music is used as the Anthem of Europe, and is the melody of the hymn Joyful, Joyful We Adore Thee. For ten points, name this piece of music, the finale of Beethoven's 9th Symphony.
Answer: Ode to Joy (

5614. At Thalamae [[THAL-ah-mee]], a cult center dedicated to a queen of this island named Pasiphaë [[PASS-if-fee]] was a pilgrimage site for travelers seeking an oracle. A king of this realm named Deucalion [[doo-KAY-lee-on]] was slain by the departing Theseus outside the gates of Knossos [[kuh-NAH-sus]], which was a major site of a Bronze Age civilization on this island. The Minoans once ruled, for ten points, what Aegean Island?
Answer: Crete (or Kriti)

5615. A toxic pool labeled for this blight is shown in a political cartoon where men labelled "Mr. Careless" and "Anti-Vaccinationist" fall off a cliff titled "Misinformation." During the Siege of Fort Pitt, Governor-General Jeffrey Amherst oversaw the gift of several blankets infected with this disease to opposing Native Americans. Edward Jenner inoculated people against, for ten points, what disease that was eradicated in the 1970s?
Answer: Smallpox (

5616. A region predominantly made of these geographical features called "Al-Ahsa" is known for producing high-quality bisht cloaks. One of these places, whose name translates to "Field of Trees," was the site of the Oracle of Amon, which confirmed Alexander the Great as Pharaoh of Egypt. The Tuareg confederations used these geographical features as waypoints while on Trans-Saharan trade routes. Siwa in Egypt is an example of, for ten points, what fertile patches of land within deserts?
Answer: Oasis (or Oases

5617. Like William Jennings Bryan, this man won a significant portion of electoral votes in multiple elections without becoming president. This man negotiated an end to the Nullification Crisis with his contemporary, John Calhoun. This Whig negotiated the admission of California into the Union three decades after accomplishing a similar feat with Missouri. For ten points, name this "Great Compromiser" from Kentucky.
Answer: Henry Clay Sr.

5618. The site of this city was purchased from the Mississauga by Lord Dorchester, though it remained unsettled until Governor John Graves Sicmoe established the town of York. John Strachan negotiated this town's surrender to the Americans in the War of 1812, after which it was the site of Government House on two occasions before it was moved to another location. William Lyons Mackenzie was the first mayor of this city until he abandoned it to lead the Upper Canada Rebellion. The Canadian National Railway built the CN Tower in, for ten points, which Ontario metropolis?
Answer: Toronto (

5619. One ruler of this name became the last British monarch to lead an army in the field at the Battle of Dettingen [[deh-TIN-gehn]]. Robert Walpole became the first British prime minister under a ruler of this name after the South Sea Bubble burst. Another ruler of this name suffered from a mental illness believed to be porphyria [[por-"FEAR"-ee-ah]] and was king during the American Revolution. For ten points, give this name of four 18th and 19th- century British monarchs.
Answer: George (

5620. Though officially called the Revolutionary Nuns, a "Guard" nicknamed for this legendary culture served under Muammar Gaddafi of Libya. Strabo [[STRAY-boh]] claimed that these people lived along the Thermodon [[THER-moh-don]] River though they had retreated beyond the realm of the Gargareans [[gar-GAR-ee-ans]] with whom these people reproduced children. Legendarily led by Penthesilea [[pen-theh-sih-LAY-uh]] during the Attic War, for ten points, what was this culture of warrior women who may have lived in Scythia [[SIH-thee-ah]]?
Answer: Amazons (

5621. A biography of this ruler was written by Xenophon [[ZEE-noh-fohn]], who described this ruler being raised by a shepherd after his grandfather ordered him killed. According to Herodotus [[heh-ROD-oh-tus]], this king died fighting the Scythian queen Tomyris [[TOM-i- riss]]. A namesake cylinder celebrates this king’s defeat of the Babylonian king Nabonidus [[NAB-o-ni-dus]]. For ten points, name this ruler of the city of Anshan and founder of the Persian Empire.
Answer: Cyrus the Great (

5622. Mehdi Bazargan resigned to protest the beginning of this event, which concluded with the signing of the Algiers Accords. The disastrous Operation Eagle Claw attempted to rescue victims of this event. This crisis ended within minutes of the inauguration of Ronald Reagan as U.S. president, following a 444 day period of imprisonment for its victims. For ten points, identify this diplomatic crisis that began when revolutionary students stormed a U.S. embassy in a Middle Eastern capital.
Answer: Iran Hostage Crisis (

5623. A “Renaissance” among these people followed the overthrow of the Gutians [[GOO- tee-ans]]. The Stele [[STEE-lee]] of the Vultures commemorates the victory of Lagash [[LAY- gash]] over Umma, both cities founded by these people. Scenes of war and daily life are shown on the Standard of Ur, created by these people. These people were the first to build step- pyramid temples called ziggurats. For ten points, name this earliest civilization to spring up in Mesopotamia.
Answer: Sumerians BONUS: The Gutians initially overthrew the Akkadian Empire, which was founded by this conqueror. He is often considered the first "Emperor" in history. Sargon the Great (or Sargon of Akkad

5624. Due to an alleged prophecy given by Jan Hus [[YAHN HOOS]], this man is often depicted with a swan. Scottish artist Joseph Noel Paton depicted this man at Erfurt discovering the doctrine of sola fide [[SOH-luh FEE-deh]]. This man was painted on several occasions by his friend and neighbor, Lucas Cranach [[KRAH-nahk]] the Elder, the court painter to the Elector of Saxony. For ten points, name this theologian and seminal figure in the Protestant Reformation who was often depicted in contemporary art.
Answer: Martin Luther BONUS: Hundreds of thousands of copies of Luther's Ninety-Five Theses were produced by this pioneering printer who developed the movable-type printing press. Johannes Gutenberg (or Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg)

5625. During this project, General Leslie Groves undertook a propaganda campaign to prevent "loose talk" by its participants. Despite his acts of treason, Klaus Fuchs [[FYOOKS]] was a key component on this project's development but later served nine years in prison for his actions. Because of his study and understanding of fast neutrons, Robert Oppenheimer was a prime member of this project. For ten points, name this top-secret U.S. project which developed the atomic bomb.
Answer: Manhattan Project (

5626. US army officer Henry Schneider revealed that this company provided a third of all trucks in the Wehrmacht through their Cologne plant which was confiscated in 1941. In the 1920s, this company attempted to set up a free state in Brazil in order to dodge the British monopoly on rubber. While not invented by this company's leader, the assembly line was popularized in the car factories of this company. For ten points, name this American based car company famous for its production of Model T's.
Answer: Ford Motor Company BONUS: While Detroit is known as the "Motor City", Ford's headquarters and the Henry Ford museum are located in what Michigan city, which was exposed in James M. Loewen's Sundown Towns for aggressively excluding Black migrants? Dearborn, Michigan Third Quarter The categories are:

5627. Was appointed to lead the Continental Army in the Revolutionary War.
Answer: George Washington

5628. Turned down the offer to lead Union troops to command the opposing Army of Northern Virginia instead.
Answer: Robert E(dward) Lee

5629. Was sent to Mexico in an attempt to capture the revolutionary Pancho Villa [[VEE- yah]].
Answer: John "Black Jack" Pershing (or John Joseph Pershing)

5630. Created the Anaconda Plan and served in the War of 1812 and the Mexican- American War.
Answer: Winfield Scott

5631. Was the last to achieve the rank of Five Star General, second in command to Eisenhower during the Liberation of France.
Answer: Omar Bradley (Omar Nelson Bradley)

5632. Was the leader of all coalition forces during Operation Desert Storm in the Persian Gulf War.
Answer: "Stormin'" Norman Schwarzkopf (or Herbert Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr.)

5633. Was named for a South American liberator and died commanding troops on Okinawa, becoming the highest-ranking U.S. officer to die from enemy fire in World War Two.
Answer: Simon Bolivar Buckner Jr. (

5634. Century in which the Seven Years' War occurred.
Answer: 18th Century (

5635. English name for the North American theater of the Seven Years' War.
Answer: French and Indian War

5636. Treaty which ended the Seven Years' War which shares its name with the treaty which ended the Revolutionary War.
Answer: Treaty of Paris (

5637. City near the Plains of Abraham, where both James Wolfe and Louis Montcalm died.
Answer: Quebec City (or Ville de Québec)

5638. "Elder" British prime minister credited for most of the victories during the Annus Mirabilis [[meer-AH-bih-liss]].
Answer: William Pitt the Elder (do not

5639. Victorious general at Plassey who, with Warren Hastings, established British hegemony [[heh-JEH-moh-nee]] in India.
Answer: Robert Clive (

5640. City at the center of the French East India Company seized by the British in 1761.
Answer: Pondicherry (

5641. Naval victory near St. Nazaire where the Comte de Conflans [[KOHMT duh cohn- FLAHN]] lost to Edward Hawke's fleet near the Bay of Biscay.
Answer: Battle of Quiberon [[kee-beh-ROHN]] Bay

5642. Empire which he ruled.
Answer: Ottoman Empire (or Ottomans

5643. Austrian capital city he besieged in 1529.
Answer: Vienna (or Wien)

5644. Serbian capital he razed in 1521.
Answer: Belgrade (

5645. Island off the coast of Anatolia ruled by the Knights of St. John which he captured.
Answer: Rhodes (

5646. Persian dynasty against which he conducted a prolonged campaign and later negotiated the Peace of Amasya [[ah-MAH-syah]].
Answer: Safavid [[SAH-fah-vid]] Dynasty

5647. European kingdom which entered an "unholy" alliance with Suleiman.
Answer: Kingdom of France (or Royaume de France)

5648. 1526 battle in which Suleiman's forces devastated the armies of Hungary, Bohemia, and Bavaria.
Answer: Battle of Mohács [[MOH-HAHCH]]

5649. Father of Suleiman known as "the Grim" who annexed the Mamluk sultanate.
Answer: S

5650. Following the U.S. Invasion of Grenada, the Edward Seaga-led Labour Party won every seat in this nation's elections due to boycotts by the People's National Party. Back to Africa proponent Marcus (+) Garvey was from this island nation, which saw multiple "Maroon Wars" against the British government. The destruction of Port (*) Royal by a 17th-century earthquake led to the founding of, for ten points, which Caribbean nation's capital of Kingston?
Answer: Republic of Jamaica (or Jumieka)

5651. These people erected a namesake "Stele" [[STEE-lee]] in modern Xi'an [[SHEE- AHN]] written in both Chinese and Syriac. Two holy men of this faith supposedly smuggled silkworms out of China and brought them to the court of Justinian the Great. Hong (+) Xiuquan [[SHU-CHWAN]], the leader of the Taiping Rebellion, claimed to be the younger brother of this faith's (*) messiah. Matteo Ricci [[REE-chee]] visited China as a Jesuit missionary of, for ten points, which Abrahamic faith?
Answer: Chinese Christians (or Christianity

5652. Henry the Lion's "Artlenburger privilege" founded a predecessor of this organization called the Gotlander Cooperative. This organization had its trading privileges with England returned following the 15th century Treaty of (+) Utrecht after a prolonged campaign of commerce raiding. This dominant power of the Baltic and North Sea trade routes included cities like (*) Hamburg and Lübeck. For ten points, name this "League" of German cities, a maritime power of the late Middles Ages.
Answer: Hanseatic League (

5653. The crowning of Joseph Bonaparte led the First Junta [[HOON-tuh]] of this city to depose Viceroy Hidalgo de Cisneros [[sis-NEH-ros]] as part of the May Revolution. A women's movement in this city marched in support of those who "disappeared" during the (+) Dirty War. This city's Plaza de Mayo and Casa Rosada presidential palace were bombed by its own air force following a pro-Juan (*) Peron demonstration. The capital of the Viceroyalty of Rio de La Plata was, for ten points, what largest city in Argentina?
Answer: Buenos Aires (

5654. During this civilization’s archaic period, the Battle of Alalia allowed its expansion to the Tyrrhenian [[tih-REE-nyen]] Sea. According to legend, twelve cities from this ancient civilization formed an eponymous (+) league founded by Tachron [[TAH-kron]]. Alleged to have begun during the Iron Age with the Villanova (*) culture, for ten points, what kingdom in ancient Italy was assimilated into Roman society in a series of eponymous wars?
Answer: Etruscan civilization (or Rasenna; or Rasna

5655. The Ottoman Empire entered this conflict on the eventual losing side during the Pruth River Campaign. The Treaty of Nystad [[NEE-stad]] allowed the winning side of this war to seize the land to construct a new capital on the Gulf of (+) Finland. The Battle of Poltava [[pohl-TAH-vuh]] during this conflict ended an invasion of (*) Russia by King Charles XII [[the twelfth]]. For ten points, name this conflict where Russia under Peter the Great ended the golden age of the Swedish Empire.
Answer: Great Northern War

5656. A November 2021 prison riot in this nation's Litoral Penitentiary led to a call for a state of emergency by President Guillermo Lasso. Wikileaks founder Julian Assange (+) was given asylum in this nation's embassy by then-president Rafael Correa [[kor-REH-ah]]. Anti-Lenin Moreno riots led to a government relocation to (*) Guayaquil [["why"-YAH-keel]] in, for ten points, what Andean nation governed from Quito?
Answer: Republic of Ecuador (

5657. In this state, an indoor concert by hair metal band Great White led to a fire in West Warwick which killed one hundred attendees. In 2015, the governor of this state proposed a luxury tax on second homes which the media dubbed the "Taylor Swift (+) Tax" due to her having beachfront property there. That governor of this state, Gina Raimondo, resigned to become Joe Biden's Secretary of Commerce. The words "Providence (*) Plantations" were dropped from the name of, for ten points, which New England state?
Answer: Rhode Island

5658. This chemist's mentors included John Ericsson, designer of the U.S.'s first ironclad, and Ascanio Sobrero, the inventor of nitroglycerin. This man turned the once royally-owned iron production company Bofors into a cannon manufacturer. This man was denounced as a (+) war profiteer in an erroneous obituary, leading him to donate his estate to create several (*) namesake awards. For ten points, name this inventor of dynamite, who created a series of prizes awarded by a Swedish foundation.
Answer: Alfred Nobel (or Alfred Bernhard Nobel

5659. The name for this object was suggested by an eleven-year old, and other suggested names for it were Zeus and Percival. When this heavenly body was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, it disproved Percival Lowell's Planet X theory. Neil deGrasse Tyson said that allowing this object to be a planet would be an "insult" to the other planets. For ten points, name this trans-Neptunian dwarf planet in the Kuiper [[KY-per]] Belt that was once called the "Ninth Planet".
Answer: Pluto

5660. This country became the first colony in sub-Saharan Africa to achieve sovereignty under the regime of Kwame Nkrumah [[KWAH-meh en-KROO-muh]]. The only Black Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan [[KOH-fee ah-NAHN]], was originally from this country. The Ashanti once dominated, for ten points, what West African country ruled by Britain as the Gold Coast colony?
Answer: Republic of Ghana (

5661. This man's illegitimate son Don John pacified a rebellion of former Muslims in Alpujarras [[al-poo-HAH-rahs]] and led a fleet which included a young Miguel De Cervantes [[sehr-VAHN-tehs]]. This Holy Roman Emperor outlawed Martin Luther's teachings in the Diet of Worms [[VURMS]], and he deployed conquistadores like Hernán Cortés to the New World. For ten points, name this Habsburg Emperor of Spain and Austria, the father of Phillip II.
Answer: Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (

5662. In 1980, this man sent a large number of criminals and mental patients among a group of dissidents allowed to leave his country in the Mariel boatlift. In 1961, the Democratic Revolutionary Front launched a disastrous attempt to overthrow this man known as the "Bay of Pigs" invasion. Two years earlier, this man took power after deposing Fulgencio Batista [[ful-JEN-syoh bah-TEE-stah]] with the aid of Che Guevara [[cheh geh-VAH-rah]]. For ten points, name this revolutionary who was the dictator of communist Cuba from 1959 to 2008.
Answer: Fidel Castro (or Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz)

5663. Despite Social Democrat attempts at moderating this government, radicals such as Alfred Hugenberg [[HYOO-gen-berg]], Ernst Thalmann's Red Front, and the Brownshirts played a key role in bringing it down. In 1932, this government's presidential election saw a World War One general, Paul von Hindenburg, claim victory. This government fell after its parliament burned down, leading to the Reichstag Fire Decree. For ten points, name this democratic German government.
Answer: Weimar Republic (or Weimarer Republik

5664. John Hyrcanus [[heer-KAH-nooss]] subjugated and converted Itureans [["eye"-TOO- ree-ans]] to this faith after a prolonged campaign. Two scholars of this faith who convinced the Himyarite [[HIM-yah-rite]] king Abu Karib to lift his siege of Yathrib later facilitated his conversion to this faith. The kingdom of Judah's fall to Nebuchadnezzar's [[NEH-boo-kahd- ZEH-zars]] forces led to a period experienced by this faith's adherents known as the Babylonian Captivity. For ten points, name this dominant faith of the Israelites.
Answer: Judaism (

5665. A subspecies of this animal named for the London Underground is thought to have caused a human encephalitis [[en-seh-fah-LAI-tiss]] outbreak in New York City. A Central American coastal kingdom that shares its name with this animal became a British protectorate before being annexed by Nicaragua. A major vector for historical and modern diseases like Yellow Fever and Malaria is, for ten points, what blood-sucking insect?
Answer: Mosquitoes (

5666. The Münzmeister [[MOONTS-my-stuh]] were heads of one of these facilities first established in the Carolingian [[kay-roh-LIN-jee-an]] Empire. In ancient Rome, these institutions evolved from the Temples of Juno Moneta. The oldest of these buildings was likely in Lydia [[LID-ee-ah]] and produced items made from electrum. The Fugio Cent was made by the United States' first example of these institutions. Often incorporating images of rulers and presidents, for ten points, what institutions produce coins?
Answer: Mints (

5667. This modern country was the heartland of the medieval Mutapa Empire. This country's predecessor state was governed briefly by Bishop Muzorewa [[moo-zoh-REH- wah]] following the Lancaster House Agreement. A "Bush War" in this country ended with the rise of the ZANU-PF and its leader Robert Mugabe. Mugabe's thirty-year presidency occurred in, for ten points, what southeast African country that succeeded Rhodesia?
Answer: Republic of Zimbabwe (

5668. The constitution of this nation that was in place until 1987 was written by U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt. After this country's president ordered the mass execution of prisoners in 1915, he was killed by a mob, leading to a U.S. occupation. Toussaint L'Ouverture [[too-SAHN loh-vehr-TOOR]] is known as the father of this country for leading it to independence. For ten points, name this country whose President Jovenel Moïse [[jove-NEL moh-EEZ]] was assassinated in 2021.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (or Republique d'Haiti; or Repiblik d Ayiti) BONUS: This family led Haiti from

5669. In the Spring and Autumn Annals, this specific term is used to refer to anyone living in the "Outside Land" beyond the realm of imperial China. This English word derives from an ancient Greek antonym for "citizen" and was used to describe all non-Greeks because their languages supposedly sounded like gibberish. For ten points, name this pejorative term, which the Romans used to refer to any "uncivilized" tribal groups beyond their borders.
Answer: Barbarians (

5670. The preaching background of this party's first leader led Morgan Phillips to comment, "Socialism in Britain owed more to Methodism than Marx." That founder of this party, Keir Hardie, resigned in favor of Arthur Henderson, who won the Nobel Peace Prize for chairing the Geneva Disarmament Conference. This party interrupted Winston Churchill's term as prime minister under the leadership of Clement Attlee. For ten points, name this currently center-left British political party, the opponent of the Conservatives.
Answer: Labour Party BONUS: Under the Attlee government, Labour minister Aneurin Bevan [[uh-NYE-rin BEH- vahn]] developed this government system that publicly funds hospitals and other social services throughout the United Kingdom.

5671. The ancient city of Zadracarta sat on this body of water and was the seat of power of Hyrcania. This body of water marked the western extent of the Chinese Empire during the Tang Dynasty. The city of Derbent, which lies on this body of water, was handed over in the Treaty of Gulistan from Persia to Russia. For ten points, name this largest inland body of water, named for an ancient Caucasian tribe.
Answer: Caspian Sea (

5672. The oldest-known evidence of this kind of event was found on a three thousand-year old Japanese skeleton discovered in 2021. After being torpedoed by the Japanese in 1945, the survivors of the USS Indianapolis dealt with hundreds of these incidents while waiting for rescue. For ten points, name these historically-feared events in which a large cartilaginous [[kar-tih-LAH-jih-nus]] fish injures or kills a human.
Answer: Shark attack (or Shark bite

5673. This author created Sylvia Gellburg, a Jewish woman who falls victim to psychosomatic paralysis after reading an article about Kristallnacht. The outing of this writer's Communist sympathies by his former friend Elia Kazan to the House Un-American Activities Committee was parodied in his play, A View from the Bridge. Joe Keller knowingly ships defective aircraft parts during the Second World War in this author's play All My Sons. The author of The Crucible was, for ten points, which mid-20th century playwright?
Answer: Arthur Miller (or Arthur Asher Miller) BONUS: Miller's most famous spouse was which film icon who was known for playing comedic blondes in films like Some Like It Hot and The Seven Year Itch? Marilyn Monroe (or Norma Jeane Mortenson)

5674. "Dynamic cubist" Jacob Lawrence painted a 60-panel series about this event, which is the subject of Isabel Wilkerson's The Warmth of Other Suns. Chester Burnett and Muddy Waters moved to Chicago during this event, which presaged the Harlem Renaissance. For ten points, name this major demographic shift in the mid-twentieth century United States, in which millions of African Americans moved out of the South.
Answer: Great Migration (

5675. Monumental structures used as tombs for rulers and powerful figures.
Answer: Pyramids

5676. Long, northbound river along which Egyptian civilization was centered.
Answer: Nile River (or an-Nil)

5677. Limestone statue of a mythical cat-like creature constructed for Khafre [[KAH-freh]].
Answer: Great Sphinx of Giza

5678. Capital of the Old Kingdom which shares its name with a Tennessee city.
Answer: Memphis

5679. Legendary vizier and architect under Djoser [[JOH-zer]] who was made a god after his death.
Answer: Imhotep

5680. Ruler of Upper Egypt whose animal name appears on a large ceremonial macehead.
Answer: King Scorpion (or Scorpion II

5681. Island annexed during his reign, the site of Boudicca's Revolt, which sacked Londinium.
Answer: Great Britain (

5682. Religious group Nero used as a scapegoat for the Great Fire of Rome, according to Tacitus.
Answer: Christianity (or Christians

5683. Number of emperors in the Year 69 who succeeded Nero, ending with Vespasian.
Answer: Four (

5684. Historiographical term for the first dynasty of Roman emperors which died out following Nero's death.
Answer: Julio-Claudian Dynasty (or Domus Julio-Claudia)

5685. Mother of Nero whom he tried to kill via poison and a collapsible boat.
Answer: Agrippina the Younger

5686. Tutor of Nero and stoic philosopher who killed himself once he was implicated in the Pisonian Conspiracy.
Answer: Seneca the Younger (or Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Younger; do not

5687. Leader known as "Mahatma."
Answer: Mahatma Gandhi (or Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi)

5688. First prime minister of independent India.
Answer: Jawaharlal Nehru (or Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru)

5689. General term for the 1947 division which separated the British Raj into Pakistan and India.
Answer: Partition of India

5690. All-India Muslim League leader who headed the independent government of Pakistan.
Answer: Muhammad Ali Jinnah (or Mahomedali Jinnahbhai)

5691. 1930 "March" sometimes known as the "Satyagraha [[sah-tyah-GRAH-hah]]."
Answer: Salt march to Dandi (

5692. Last British Governor-General of India who oversaw official independence.
Answer: Lord Mountbatten (or Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma)

5693. A man named Antipholus [[ahn-TEH-foh-lus]] and his servant Dromio, both residents of this island, travel to Ephesus [[eh-FUH-sus]] in search of their respective twins in the Shakespearean play The Comedy of Errors. Italian writer Luigi Pirandello wrote his play (*) Six Character's in Search of an Author in this island's native dialect. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe [[GUR-tuh]] wrote a travelogue about climbing Mt. (*) Etna on, for ten points, what southern Italian island?
Answer: Sicily (

5694. Several powers in this conflict were criticized in the pamphlet The Conduct of the Allies. A 70-day siege of Tournai [[toor-NAY]] occurred during this conflict, in which one side lost over 10,000 men in a victory over the Duke of Villars. A monopoly over the (+) slave trade was given to England in the treaty ending this conflict. A battle in this war led to a number of poems written to celebrate the Duke of (*) Marlborough. For ten points, name this Europe-wide conflict in which the Battle of Blenheim [[BLEN-em]] was fought.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession

5695. Historian Walter LaFeber [[lah-FEE-ber]] wrote that U.S. intervention in this overseas conflict marked “the origins of modern presidential powers.” Five thousand troops from the U.S. were sent by President McKinley to quell this rebellion sometimes called the (+) Yìhétuán [[YEE-HEH-TWAHN]] Movement. This armed conflict arose from increasing tensions between foreign missionaries and (*) Chinese rebels. For ten points, name this late 19th-century Chinese rebellion led by the Righteous and Harmonious Fists.
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (or Boxer Uprising

5696. An Aristophanes [[ah-reh-STOH-fah-nees]] play titled for this occupation included a competition of who can be more shameless between a sausage seller and an analogue of the politician Creon. Arcite [[ahr-SEE-teh]] and Palamon are (+) two soldiers imprisoned in a tower by Theseus and fall in love with his sister-in-law Emelye [["Emily"]] in a "Tale" (*) named for this profession. In one story, Gawain battles a "Green" one of these people. For ten points, name this medieval chivalric class of warriors.
Answer: Knights (

5697. While proconsul of Cilicia [[sih-LIH-shuh]], this man marched two battered legions to relieve the siege of fellow governor Cassius from a Parthian siege at Antioch. Publius Clodius Pulcher [[POOL-care]] directly targeted this politician by passing a law to exile any public official who (+) executed a Roman citizen without trial. This man, who put down the Cataline Conspiracy, later refused to join the (*) First Triumvirate. For ten points, name this Roman orator of the 1st century B.C.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero

5698. A bank connected to this man run by Roberto Calvi faced controversy after it funneled money to both sides of the Nicaraguan Civil War. This figure narrowly escaped the Nazi Black Sunday roundup of youth after the Warsaw (+) Ghetto uprising, hiding in his uncle’s basement in Krakow. Grey Wolves member Mehmet Ali Agca [[AHD-juh]] fired and injured this (*) holy figure in St. Peter’s Square. For ten points, name this Polish Pope who was succeeded by Benedict XVI [[the sixteenth]].
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or Ioannes Paulus II

5699. Details of this event were first revealed in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle. Some of the men involved in planning this event battled the Sheriff of Worcester [[WOO-ster]] at Holbeche [["HOLE"-beech]] House, where this event’s leader, (+) Robert Catesby [[KATES-bee]], was killed. Eight of the conspirators involved in this event were convicted at a subsequent trial, including (*) Guy Fawkes. For ten points, name this failed plan to destroy the House of Lords and assassinate King James I.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot (or Gunpowder Treason Plot

5700. Because of this man’s system of natural philosophy, Gisbert Voetius [[GIZ-behrt VEE-tee-ooss]] persuaded the University of Utrecht [[YOO-trekt]] to condemn this man, who retaliated with the publication of Comments on a Certain Broadsheet. Using the (+) “Wax Example,” this man theorized that things are perceived through our intellect, and he believed deductive reasoning proved God’s (*) existence. This man developed a system to plot points on a namesake plane. For ten points, name this French mathematician and philosopher whose views are best exemplified by his quote, “I think therefore I am.”
Answer: René Descartes [[deh-KAHRT]] (or Renatus Cartesius

5701. The earliest example of these objects were found in Oregon's Fort Rock Cave. A set of these objects belonging to Ötzi [[UHT-zee]] the Ice Man had a bearskin base and deerskin side panels. (+) Caligula's nickname derived from a pair of "little" examples of these objects, an example of which, the (*) moccasin, was worn by Native Americans. Alpargatas and clogs are historical examples of, for ten points, what articles of clothing?
Answer: shoes (

5702. The name for this object was suggested by an eleven-year old, and other suggested names for it were Zeus and Percival. When this heavenly body was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, it disproved Percival Lowell's Planet X theory. Neil deGrasse Tyson said that allowing this object to be a planet would be an "insult" to the other planets. For ten points, name this trans-Neptunian dwarf planet in the Kuiper [[KY-per]] Belt that was once called the "Ninth Planet".
Answer: Pluto

5703. This country was governed by flight lieutenant Jerry Rawlings following a 1981 coup against the Convention People's Party. This country became the first colony in sub-Saharan Africa to achieve sovereignty under the regime of Kwame Nkrumah [[KWAH-meh en-KROO- muh]]. The only Black Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan [[KOH-fee ah- NAHN]], was originally from this country. The Ashanti once dominated, for ten points, what West African country ruled by Britain as the Gold Coast colony?
Answer: Republic of Ghana (

5704. This man's illegitimate son Don John pacified a rebellion of former Muslims in Alpujarras [[al-poo-HAH-rahs]] and led a fleet which included a young Miguel De Cervantes [[sehr-VAHN-tehs]]. This Holy Roman Emperor outlawed Martin Luther's teachings in the Diet of Worms [[VURMS]], and he deployed conquistadores like Hernán Cortés to the New World. For ten points, name this Habsburg Emperor of Spain and Austria, the father of Phillip II.
Answer: Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (

5705. In 1980, this man sent a large number of criminals and mental patients among a group of dissidents allowed to leave his country in the Mariel boatlift. In 1961, the Democratic Revolutionary Front launched a disastrous attempt to overthrow this man known as the "Bay of Pigs" invasion. Two years earlier, this man took power after deposing Fulgencio Batista [[ful-JEN-syoh bah-TEE-stah]] with the aid of Che Guevara [[cheh geh-VAH-rah]]. For ten points, name this revolutionary who was the dictator of communist Cuba from 1959 to 2008.
Answer: Fidel Castro (or Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz)

5706. Despite Social Democrat attempts at moderating this government, radicals such as Alfred Hugenberg [[HYOO-gen-berg]], Ernst Thalmann's Red Front, and the Brownshirts played a key role in bringing it down. In 1932, this government's presidential election saw a World War One general, Paul von Hindenburg, claim victory. This government fell after its parliament burned down, leading to the Reichstag Fire Decree. For ten points, name this democratic German government.
Answer: Weimar Republic (or Weimarer Republik

5707. John Hyrcanus [[heer-KAH-nooss]] subjugated and converted Itureans [["eye"-TOO- ree-ans]] to this faith after a prolonged campaign. Two scholars of this faith who convinced the Himyarite [[HIM-yah-rite]] king Abu Karib to lift his siege of Yathrib later facilitated his conversion to this faith. The kingdom of Judah's fall to Nebuchadnezzar's [[NEH-boo-kahd- ZEH-zars]] forces led to a period experienced by this faith's adherents known as the Babylonian Captivity. For ten points, name this dominant faith of the Israelites.
Answer: Judaism (

5708. A subspecies of this animal named for the London Underground is thought to have caused a human encephalitis [[en-seh-fah-LAI-tiss]] outbreak in New York City. A "wooden wonder" manufactured by de Havilland and named for this animal was a high-speed light bomber used in World War Two. A Central American coastal kingdom that shares its name with this animal became a British protectorate before being annexed by Nicaragua. A major vector for historical and modern diseases like Yellow Fever and Malaria is, for ten points, what blood-sucking insect?
Answer: Mosquitoes (

5709. Germany long resisted the implementation of this policy until the SPD made it the key point of coalition negotiations in 2013. A 1994 article by Alan Kreuger and David Card found that differences in this policy between New Jersey and Pennsylvania did not affect employment rates. This policy was first implemented in the U.S. by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and was last changed in 2007 at the federal level when it was set at $7.25. For ten points, name this lowest legally allowed rate for hourly labor compensation.
Answer: Minimum wage (

5710. The Münzmeister [[MOONTS-my-stuh]] were heads of one of these facilities first established in the Carolingian [[kay-roh-LIN-jee-an]] Empire, usually coming from the burgher class. In ancient Rome, these institutions evolved from the Temples of Juno Moneta. The oldest of these buildings was likely in Lydia [[LID-ee-ah]] and produced items made from electrum. The Fugio Cent was made by the United States' first example of these institutions. Often incorporating images of rulers and presidents, for ten points, what institutions produce coins?
Answer: Mints (

5711. The Wadai Sultanate annexed a kingdom southeast of this body of water which was ruled by "Mbang" kings and was called Bagirmi. Ibn Furtu chronicled the military exploits of a Mai of an empire near this body of water named Idris Alooma. This lake shares its name with a country which with Libya fought the Toyota War over the Aouzu Strip. This lake in the Sahel has shrunk by 95% since 1960. For ten points, identify this lake that names a country governed from N’Djamena [[uhn-jah-MAY-nuh]].
Answer: Lake Chad

5712. This modern country was the heartland of the medieval Mutapa Empire. This country's predecessor state was governed briefly by Bishop Muzorewa [[moo-zoh-REH- wah]] following the Lancaster House Agreement. A "Bush War" in this country ended with the rise of the ZANU-PF and its leader Robert Mugabe. Mugabe's thirty-year presidency occurred in, for ten points, what southeast African country that succeeded Rhodesia?
Answer: Republic of Zimbabwe (

5713. The constitution of this nation that was in place until 1987 was written by U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt. After this country's president ordered the mass execution of prisoners in 1915, he was killed by a mob, leading to a U.S. occupation. Toussaint L'Ouverture [[too-SAHN loh-vehr-TOOR]] is known as the father of this country for leading it to independence. For ten points, name this country whose President Jovenel Moïse [[jove-NEL moh-EEZ]] was assassinated in 2021.
Answer: Republic of Haiti (or Republique d'Haiti; or Repiblik d Ayiti) BONUS: This family led Haiti from

5714. In the Spring and Autumn Annals, this specific term is used to refer to anyone living in the "Outside Land" beyond the realm of imperial China. This English word derives from an ancient Greek antonym for "citizen" and was used to describe all non-Greeks because their languages supposedly sounded like gibberish. For ten points, name this pejorative term, which the Romans used to refer to any "uncivilized" tribal groups beyond their borders.
Answer: Barbarians (

5715. The preaching background of this party's first leader led Morgan Phillips to comment, "Socialism in Britain owed more to Methodism than Marx." That founder of this party, Keir Hardie, resigned in favor of Arthur Henderson, who won the Nobel Peace Prize for chairing the Geneva Disarmament Conference. This party interrupted Winston Churchill's term as prime minister under the leadership of Clement Attlee. For ten points, name this currently center-left British political party, the opponent of the Conservatives.
Answer: Labour Party BONUS: Under the Attlee government, Labour minister Aneurin Bevan [[uh-NYE-rin BEH- vahn]] developed this government system that publicly funds hospitals and other social services throughout the United Kingdom.

5716. The ancient city of Zadracarta sat on this body of water and was the seat of power of Hyrcania. This body of water marked the western extent of the Chinese Empire during the Tang Dynasty, and it was primarily explored by Fedor Soimonov [[SOY-mon-off]] during the reign of Peter the Great. The city of Derbent, which lies on this body of water, was handed over in the Treaty of Gulistan from Persia to Russia. For ten points, name this largest inland body of water, named for an ancient Caucasian tribe.
Answer: Caspian Sea (

5717. The oldest-known evidence of this kind of event was found on a three thousand-year old Japanese skeleton discovered in 2021. A number of these incidents occurred on the Jersey Shore in 1916, and, after being torpedoed by the Japanese in 1945, the survivors of the USS Indianapolis dealt with hundreds of these incidents while waiting for rescue. For ten points, name these historically-feared events in which a large cartilaginous [[kar-tih-LAH-jih-nus]] fish injures or kills a human.
Answer: Shark attack (or Shark bite

5718. This author created Sylvia Gellburg, a Jewish woman who falls victim to psychosomatic paralysis after reading an article about Kristallnacht. The outing of this writer's Communist sympathies by his former friend Elia Kazan to the House Un-American Activities Committee was parodied in his play, A View from the Bridge. Joe Keller knowingly ships defective aircraft parts during the Second World War in this author's play All My Sons. The author of The Crucible was, for ten points, which mid-20th century playwright?
Answer: Arthur Miller (or Arthur Asher Miller) BONUS: Miller's most famous spouse was which film icon who was known for playing comedic blondes in films like Some Like It Hot and The Seven Year Itch? Marilyn Monroe (or Norma Jeane Mortenson)

5719. "Dynamic cubist" Jacob Lawrence painted a 60-panel series about this event, which is the subject of Isabel Wilkerson's The Warmth of Other Suns. Chester Burnett and Muddy Waters moved to Chicago during this event, which presaged the Harlem Renaissance. For ten points, name this major demographic shift in the mid-twentieth century United States, in which millions of African Americans moved out of the South.
Answer: Great Migration (

5720. Monumental structures used as tombs for rulers and powerful figures.
Answer: Pyramids

5721. Long, northbound river along which Egyptian civilization was centered.
Answer: Nile River (or an-Nil)

5722. Limestone statue of a mythical cat-like creature constructed for Khafre [[KAH-freh]].
Answer: Great Sphinx of Giza

5723. Capital of the Old Kingdom which shares its name with a Tennessee city.
Answer: Memphis

5724. Legendary vizier and architect under Djoser [[JOH-zer]] who was made a god after his death.
Answer: Imhotep

5725. Founder of the First Dynasty who is credited with uniting Upper and Lower Egypt.
Answer: Menes [[MEE-neez]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

5726. Ruler of Upper Egypt whose animal name appears on a large ceremonial macehead.
Answer: King Scorpion (or Scorpion II

5727. Egyptian historian from the era of the Ptolemaic dynasty who recorded the lineage of pharaohs from the Old Kingdom.
Answer: Manetho [[MAN-ih-thoo]] (be lenient on pronunciation)

5728. Island annexed during his reign, the site of Boudicca's Revolt, which sacked Londinium.
Answer: Great Britain (

5729. Religious group Nero used as a scapegoat for the Great Fire of Rome, according to Tacitus.
Answer: Christianity (or Christians

5730. Number of emperors in the Year 69 who succeeded Nero, ending with Vespasian.
Answer: Four (

5731. Historiographical term for the first dynasty of Roman emperors which died out following Nero's death.
Answer: Julio-Claudian Dynasty (or Domus Julio-Claudia)

5732. Mother of Nero whom he tried to kill via poison and a collapsible boat.
Answer: Agrippina the Younger

5733. Tutor of Nero and stoic philosopher who killed himself once he was implicated in the Pisonian Conspiracy.
Answer: Seneca the Younger (or Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Younger; do not

5734. Freedman who killed Nero, put to death twenty years later by Domitian for that crime.
Answer: Tiberius Claudius Epaphroditus [[eh-PAH-froh-"DIE"-tuss]]

5735. Phrase said by Nero's mother shortly before her assassination, cursing Nero for being her child.
Answer: "Smite my Womb" (

5736. Leader known as "Mahatma."
Answer: Mahatma Gandhi (or Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi)

5737. First prime minister of independent India.
Answer: Jawaharlal Nehru (or Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru)

5738. General term for the 1947 division which separated the British Raj into Pakistan and India.
Answer: Partition of India

5739. All-India Muslim League leader who headed the independent government of Pakistan.
Answer: Muhammad Ali Jinnah (or Mahomedali Jinnahbhai)

5740. 1930 "March" sometimes known as the "Satyagraha [[sah-tyah-GRAH-hah]]."
Answer: Salt march to Dandi (

5741. Last British Governor-General of India who oversaw official independence.
Answer: Lord Mountbatten (or Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma)

5742. Hindu term for "self-governance," used synonymously with "home-rule."
Answer: Swaraj [[SWAH-rahj]]

5743. Leader of the INA who made overtures to the Axis powers in an attempt to free the subcontinent from British rule.
Answer: Subhas Chandra Bose (

5744. A man named Antipholus [[ahn-TEH-foh-lus]] and his servant Dromio, both residents of this island, travel to Ephesus [[eh-FUH-sus]] in search of their respective twins in the Shakespearean play The Comedy of Errors. Italian writer Luigi Pirandello wrote his play (*) Six Character's in Search of an Author in this island's native dialect. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe [[GUR-tuh]] wrote a travelogue about climbing Mt. (*) Etna on, for ten points, what southern Italian island?
Answer: Sicily (

5745. Several powers in this conflict were criticized in the pamphlet The Conduct of the Allies. A 70-day siege of Tournai [[toor-NAY]] occurred during this conflict, in which one side lost over 10,000 men in a victory over the Duke of Villars. A monopoly over the (+) slave trade was given to England in the treaty ending this conflict. A battle in this war led to a number of poems written to celebrate the Duke of (*) Marlborough. For ten points, name this Europe-wide conflict in which the Battle of Blenheim [[BLEN-em]] was fought.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession

5746. Historian Walter LaFeber [[lah-FEE-ber]] wrote that U.S. intervention in this overseas conflict marked “the origins of modern presidential powers.” Five thousand troops from the U.S. were sent by President McKinley to quell this rebellion sometimes called the (+) Yìhétuán [[YEE-HEH-TWAHN]] Movement. This armed conflict arose from increasing tensions between foreign missionaries and (*) Chinese rebels. For ten points, name this late 19th-century Chinese rebellion led by the Righteous and Harmonious Fists.
Answer: Boxer Rebellion (or Boxer Uprising

5747. An Aristophanes [[ah-reh-STOH-fah-nees]] play titled for this occupation included a competition of who can be more shameless between a sausage seller and an analogue of the politician Creon. Arcite [[ahr-SEE-teh]] and Palamon are (+) two soldiers imprisoned in a tower by Theseus and fall in love with his sister-in-law Emelye [["Emily"]] in a "Tale" (*) named for this profession. In one story, Gawain battles a "Green" one of these people. For ten points, name this medieval chivalric class of warriors.
Answer: Knights (

5748. While proconsul of Cilicia [[sih-LIH-shuh]], this man marched two battered legions to relieve the siege of fellow governor Cassius from a Parthian siege at Antioch. Publius Clodius Pulcher [[POOL-care]] directly targeted this politician by passing a law to exile any public official who (+) executed a Roman citizen without trial. This man, who put down the Cataline Conspiracy, later refused to join the (*) First Triumvirate. For ten points, name this Roman orator of the 1st century B.C.
Answer: Marcus Tullius Cicero

5749. A bank connected to this man run by Roberto Calvi faced controversy after it funneled money to both sides of the Nicaraguan Civil War. This figure narrowly escaped the Nazi Black Sunday roundup of youth after the Warsaw (+) Ghetto uprising, hiding in his uncle’s basement in Krakow. Grey Wolves member Mehmet Ali Agca [[AHD-juh]] fired and injured this (*) holy figure in St. Peter’s Square. For ten points, name this Polish Pope who was succeeded by Benedict XVI [[the sixteenth]].
Answer: Pope John Paul II (or Ioannes Paulus II

5750. Details of this event were first revealed in an anonymous letter sent to William Parker, 4th Baron Monteagle. Some of the men involved in planning this event battled the Sheriff of Worcester [[WOO-ster]] at Holbeche [["HOLE"-beech]] House, where this event’s leader, (+) Robert Catesby [[KATES-bee]], was killed. Eight of the conspirators involved in this event were convicted at a subsequent trial, including (*) Guy Fawkes. For ten points, name this failed plan to destroy the House of Lords and assassinate King James I.
Answer: Gunpowder Plot (or Gunpowder Treason Plot

5751. Because of this man’s system of natural philosophy, Gisbert Voetius [[GIZ-behrt VEE-tee-ooss]] persuaded the University of Utrecht [[YOO-trekt]] to condemn this man, who retaliated with the publication of Comments on a Certain Broadsheet. Using the (+) “Wax Example,” this man theorized that things are perceived through our intellect, and he believed deductive reasoning proved God’s (*) existence. This man developed a system to plot points on a namesake plane. For ten points, name this French mathematician and philosopher whose views are best exemplified by his quote, “I think therefore I am.”
Answer: René Descartes [[deh-KAHRT]] (or Renatus Cartesius

5752. The earliest example of these objects were found in Oregon's Fort Rock Cave. A set of these objects belonging to Ötzi [[UHT-zee]] the Ice Man had a bearskin base and deerskin side panels. (+) Caligula's nickname derived from a pair of "little" examples of these objects, an example of which, the (*) moccasin, was worn by Native Americans. Alpargatas and clogs are historical examples of, for ten points, what articles of clothing?
Answer: shoes (

5753. This man defeated Licinius at the Battle of Chrysopolis [[kry-SAH-poh-lis]], and his eldest son, Crispus, won the Battle of the Hellespont. According to Eusebius of Caesarea, this man had a vision of the sign of the Chi-Rho [[KY-ROH]] before a battle in which he defeated Maxentius. That battle marked this man’s possible conversion to Christianity and was fought on the Milvian Bridge. For the point, identify this Roman emperor who established a namesake capital at the site of Byzantium.
Answer: Constantine I (or Constantine the Great)

5754. Adherents of this myth system celebrated the summer Kupala Night and the Day of the Young Shoots. This system's fire goddess Ognyena often became conflated with Mary after adherents of this system were Christianized, starting with a mass baptism in 988. In this myth system, the evil dragon god Veles was opposed in attacks on the sacred oak tree by the eagle- like chief of the gods, Perun. For the point, name this myth system that was practiced by the pre-Christian inhabitants of Serbia, Poland, and Russia.
Answer: Slavic myth (

5755. In the present day, this group's interests are advocated by the Inkatha Freedom Party. This group was led by Dingane [[din-GAH-nay]] when it encountered the Voortrekkers. This group's expansion out of the area between the Tugela and Pongola rivers triggered a series of population displacements known as the "mfecane" [[em-fuh-KAH-nay]] or "crushing." This group won the Battle of Isandlwana [[IS-ahn-dahl-WAH-nah]] under its king Cetshwayo [[set- SHWY-oh]] during a war against the British Empire. For the point, name this South African ethnic group that expanded under the king Shaka.
Answer: Zulu People (or Zulu Kingdom; or Zulu Empire)

5756. The formation of an "African High Command" was a major goal of this leader, who was overthrown in absentia by the "National Liberation Council" while he was in transit from North Vietnam to China. This man's government hosted W.E.B. DuBois in the last years of his life, during which this man took the title "Osagyefo," or "Redeemer." Large public works based on cocoa exports were a key pillar of this man's regime after he led the former Gold Coast to independence. For the point, name this first president of Ghana.
Answer: Kwame NkrumahSpring League

5757. During this war, Air Force chief of staff Ronald Fogleman accidentally leaked classified information about an American hostage at a press conference. While participating in an attempt at enforcing a no-fly zone in this conflict, Scott O'Grady's F-16 was shot down by an SA-6 missile. The U.S. participated in this conflict as part of Operation Deliberate Force and hosted negotiations to end it at the Dayton Accords. For the point, the U.S. intervened as part of a NATO force in what early 1990s series of conflicts over the breakup of a Balkan Communist state?
Answer: Yugoslav War(s) (

5758. This building was renovated in the 19th century under the supervision of Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, and the Magnificat was sung in this location to celebrate a 1944 liberation of its surrounding city. King Louis VII [[the Seventh]] and Pope Alexander III oversaw the laying of this building's cornerstone in 1163. The wood roof known as this building's "forest" was completely destroyed in an April 2019 fire that started a five-year rebuilding project. For the point, name this Gothic cathedral that has stood since the 12th century in Paris.
Answer: Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris (or Notre Dame Cathedral)

5759. Diodorus of Sicily borrowed this unit's name to refer to white shield-bearing noble infantrymen in the ranks of Carthaginian armies. Under the general Pelopidas, this unit's performance during the Battle of Leuctra shattered the concept of Spartan hegemony following the Peloponnesian War. This hoplite unit was massacred by Phillip II of Macedon during the Battle of Chaeronea [[kay-roh-NAY-uh]]. 150 pairs of same-sex lovers made up, for the point, which elite infantry of Thebes?
Answer: Sacred Band of Thebes (or Hieròs Lókhos)

5760. A ruler of this duchy called for a crusade at the Feast of the Pheasant. Another ruler of this region organized the League of the Public Weal and was killed at the Battle of Nancy [[non-SEE]] while invading Switzerland. Charles the Bold and Philip the Good ruled this duchy, which names a French noble house that allied with England in the Hundred Years’ War after John the Fearless was killed on a bridge at Montereau [[mon-TROH]]. For the point, name this duchy that once controlled much of Franche-Comte [[FRONSH caw-TAY]] and the Low Countries before being incorporated into France.
Answer: Duchy of Burgundy (

5761. France withdrew its diplomat Philippe Étienne [[EH-tee-ehn]] from the U.S. following this man's administration's sale of nuclear-powered submarines to Australia. A sticker of a politician saying "I Did That" next to the gas pump display went viral following grassroots Republican support. Americans received fourteen hundred dollar checks following this president's signing of the American Rescue Plan Act. Kamala Harris serves as the vice president of, for the point, which U.S. president since 2021?
Answer: Joe Biden (or Joseph Robinette Biden Jr.)

5762. During this event, a cache of diamonds worth over 1.5 percent of the national economy was lost at the Casa da India. A flexible wooden "cage" was named for a man tasked with rewriting building codes after this event. The massive amounts of candles lit for All Saints' Day worsened the fires in the wake of this event, which led to the modernizing Marquis of Pombal taking power. A slip on the Azores-Gibraltar faultline caused this event, which is depicted in Candide. For the point, identify this 1755 natural disaster which devastated the capital of Portugal.
Answer: Great Lisbon Earthquake

5763. These people, whose name may be derived from the Quechua term for "vagabond," included a Jewish subgroup led by industrialist Maurice von Hirsch. Future president Domingo Sarmiento wrote a semi-fictional account of one of these people in Facundo who terrorizes the region of Entre Rios. These vaqueros worked as cattle herders and hunters for ranches called estancias [[eh-STAWN-see-AHS]]. For the point, name these Spanish-speaking cowboys of the Pampas.
Answer: Gauchos (

5764. The legendary republic of Libertatia in Madagascar was founded by these people who were the subject of a “General History” by Charles Johnson. One of these people was hunted down by a force led by Alexander Spotswood after blockading Charleston for five days. Mary Read and Anne Bonny became famous as female members of this profession who both avoided execution by claiming to be pregnant. The "Golden Age" of this profession was centered on locations such as Tortuga and Port Royal in the 18th-century Caribbean. For the point, name these people who included Blackbeard.
Answer: Pirates (

5765. Rulers of this empire temporarily reversed its collapse after expelling the marauding archon Mihirakula [[mee-hee-rah-KOO-lah]], the son of a Hephthalite king. The playwright Kalidasa was a court poet for a ruler of this empire, which vied for supremacy on the Deccan plateau with the Vakataka kingdom. This empire's exploits are recorded on the Allahabad Pillar, detailing which frontier kingdoms paid tribute to them. Vikramaditya [[vee-krahm-ah- DEEHT-yah]] was a king of, for the point, which Indian empire that was destroyed by the "White Huns"?
Answer: Gupta Empire

5766. American civil engineer Charles S. Storrow left a lengthy journal of this event while he was completing his thesis at the École des ponts. The attempted passage of the Ordinances of Saint-Cloud led to this violent period. The sacking of the Tuileries Palace occurred on the final day of this event's "Three Glorious Days," which led to the widespread exile of "Legitimists" in favor of "Bourbonists." The abdication of the Charles X [["the Tenth"]] occurred due to, for the point, which 1830 French Revolution that culminated in the coronation of Louis Philippe in a namesake summer month?
Answer: July Revolution (

5767. Napoleonic veteran Joseph Seve [[SEV]] converted to Islam and joined this ruler's retinue to develop a new soldiers' school in Aswan. This man, who lost the battle of Navarino with his son Ibrahim, later went to war with his former overlord after they refused to cede Syria to him. Following a French withdrawal from one region, this Albanian and his European mercenaries decimated the Mamlukes in a massacre at Cairo Citadel. 19th century Egypt was reformed by, for the point, what "Pasha" and general under the Ottomans?
Answer: Muhammad Ali Pasha (or Muhammad Ali of Egypt (and the Sudan)

5768. This general, who was known as the "Gray-eyed man of destiny," lost the Second Battle of Rivas to Costa Rican hero José María Cañas [[CAH-nyahs]]. Following a revocation of shipping rights, Cornelius Vanderbilt sent a private army backed by various Central American nations to overthrow this man's regime. This man's first expedition seized Baja California, declaring the Republic of Sonora until Mexican forces kicked him out. For the point, name this American Filibuster who seized control of Nicaragua for ten months.
Answer: William WalkerSpring League

5769. Chandragupta II erected pillars of this substance that tell of his conquest of the Vanga people and his crossing of the seven rivers of India. During the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Zhen published a pamphlet that outlined how waterwheels were used to operate furnaces, creating the pure form of this product. The Nok Culture of modern Nigeria was the first in Africa to make use of this metal. The Hittite Empire is often credited for smelting this metal to equip its armies. The Bronze Age preceded, for the point, an age named for what metal?
Answer: Iron (

5770. Negotiating peace with this empire was the first major action of Philip the Arab. Julian the Apostate was mortally wounded at Samarra, forcing his successor Jovian to make peace with this empire. The only Roman emperor to be captured in battle, Valerian, was taken prisoner alongside his army by this empire in the disastrous Battle of Edessa. This Zoroastrian empire was led by Ardashir I, who overthrew the Parthians. For the point, identify this Persian empire that was ended by the Muslim conquest of the Middle East.
Answer: Sassanid Empire (

5771. A 2008 riot in this nation occurred after football fans of the team Socozaki claimed the rival goalkeeper cast a spell on the field. In this nation, child-soldiers known as kadogos hatched a successful plot known as Operation Mbongo Zero to kill President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. That president was succeeded by his son, Joseph, who led this nation during and after the "Great African War" between this nation and neighboring militia from Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda. Men like Patrice Lumumba and Mobutu Sese-Seko once led, for the point, which Central African state governed from Kinshasa?
Answer: Democratic Republic of the Congo (

5772. A leader of this country likened to Napoleon, Jorge Ubico, offered major concessions to banana companies before being overthrown in a 1944 revolution that led to the election of Juan Jose Arevalo. In 1954, the CIA-led Operation PBSuccess, lobbied for by the United Fruit Company, overthrew another of its revolutionary opponents, Jacobo Árbenz. For the point, name this Central American country where Efraín Ríos carried out attacks on the Mayan people.
Answer: Republic of Guatemala (or República de Guatemala)Spring League

5773. Confucius outlined the beneficial type of this artform as yayue, labelling it essential for self-cultivation in the Analects. Art found in Mohenjo-Daro depicts a bronze statue of a girl performing this activity, seen with her hand on her hip. Plantation slaves developed one of these artistic performances known as the "cakewalk" in a subtle mockery of their slaveholding owners. The Cha-Cha and Waltz are types of, for the point, what kind of rhythmic movement often done with a partner?
Answer: Dance (

5774. In an effort to dismiss Erich von Däniken's claim that ancient astronauts created this site, Joe Nickell and a small team recreated these sites without aerial assistance and utilizing pre-Columbian tools. This site was inadvertently damaged by Greenpeace activists in 2014 after they set up banners there, leading to extensive fines from the Humala administration. A monkey with a spiral tail and a heron are two of the glyphs present at, for the point, what group of geoglyphs in a namesake desert in Peru?
Answer: Nazca Lines (

5775. In this city, the characters Duman, Pskiopat, and Bengü are among the seven cats depicted in the 2016 documentary Kedi. In another film, a man travels to this city to accept the defection of Tatiana Romanova, who plans to steal a Soviet Lektor machine. This non- Russian city is the setting of the first half of From Russia with Love. The film Fetih 1453 depicts Mehmet II's conquest of, for the point, what Turkish city, formerly the capital of the Byzantine Empire? For the point, name this city whose conquest from the Byzantine Empire is the subject of the film
Answer: Istanbul (or Constantinople

5776. This currency was used to pay out dual-currency debt instruments denominated in dollars known as tesobonos. A 50 billion dollar IMF bailout followed the December 1994 collapse of this currency. Confidence in this currency was lowered by the assassination of Luis Donaldo Colosio and the intensifying Zapatista uprising in Chiapas. The devaluation of this currency became known as the Tequila Crisis. Established officially in 1821 by the First Empire, for the point, what is this Mexican currency?
Answer: (Mexican) Peso

5777. This man, who held a PhD in anthropology, joined a paramilitary group known as the "Steel Helmet" after he graduated high school and studied under Otmar von Verschuer, who would go on to direct the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute. This man attempted several experiments, including changing eye color and sewing twins together while in his most notable position. Fleeing after World War Two to Argentina, for the point, who was this Nazi German scientist at Auschwitz, known as the "Angel of Death"?
Answer: Josef Mengele [[MEN-geh-luh]] (

5778. A Serbian king of this name came to power in the May Coup after officers assassinated the sitting royals of the Obrenović [[oh-BREH-noh-vich]] dynasty in 1903. Another man of this name led Christians in the Rhineland Massacres, which targeted Jews during the "People's Crusade." An emperor of this name undertook a "Grand Embassy of Europe," working jobs such as shipbuilding in the Netherlands in an attempt to modernize Russia. The first pope of the Catholic Church had, for the point, what name, shared by a "Great" Russian ruler?
Answer: Peter (

5779. The protégé of Umberto Eco, Angelo Fabri, was killed at this institution during the politically motivated DAMS murders. The first female professor in Europe, Laura Bassi, worked in this institution and was responsible for popularizing Newtonian Physics in Italy. This university, which was formally chartered by Frederick Barbarossa, began after an 11th century guild of students organized into "nations." For the point, name this oldest continuously-operating university in the world, located in a Northern Italian city.
Answer: University of Bologna [[boh-lohn-YAH]] (

5780. This book was removed from Russian bookstores immediately before Victory Day in 2014 due to its cover artwork. This book was derived from four days of interviews with the author's father, Vladek, who was at one point interned at Gross-Rosen. In January 2022, the board of trustees for McMinn County Schools in Tennessee unanimously banned this book, sparking national outrage. Depicting Germans as cats, for the point, what is this Art Spiegelman graphic novel about a Polish Jew's experience of the Holocaust?
Answer: MausSpring League

5781. This location appears in the title of a Stephen Vincent Benet story in which the protagonist searches a ruined New York City. A Jorge Luis Borges story partly titled for this location describes the rewards and punishments of its "lottery." Another story partly named for this city features an alcoholic protagonist named Charlie Wales who travels to Paris to regain custody of his daughter. For the point, what ancient city is "Revisited" in a short story by F. Scott Fitzgerald?
Answer: Babylon (

5782. The abolition of this country’s monarchy occurred during an economic crisis named for the act of mounting a horse, the Encilhamento [[EN-cil-ha-men-to]]. This country's purchase of three dreadnoughts began a naval arms race with the two other members of the 'ABC powers.' Cattle and coffee barons controlled this country’s politics during its "coffee with milk" period. Slavery in this country was abolished in the 1888 Golden Law. For the point, name this South American country ruled by the Emperor Pedro II.
Answer: Federative Republic of Brazil (or República Federativa do Brasil

5783. An axe blow to the head nearly knocked out a king at this battle while he attempted to shield his brother, the wounded Duke of Gloucester [[GLAH-ster]]. According to one account, skirmishers at this battle used war hammers known as "mauls" to drive stakes into the ground. In the aftermath of this battle, the Burgundians marched on Paris and Charles VI [[the Sixth]] signed the Treaty of Troyes [[TWAH]]. The English longbowmen of Henry V triumphed over the French at, for the point, what 1415 battle during the Hundred Years' War?
Answer: Battle of Agincourt (

5784. The signing of the Cullen-Harrison Act liberalized this policy, which ended later the same year. This policy was enabled by the Volstead Act, and its promoters included the Woman's Christian Temperance Union and the Anti-Saloon League. Begun with the 18th Amendment in 1920 and ended by the 21st Amendment in 1933, for the point, what policy instituted a Constitutional ban on the production and sale of alcohol?
Answer: Prohibition (

5785. An 1874 courthouse riot in this country was led by Hulu, the leader of the Emmaites faction of Queen Emma. A land redistribution scheme in this country was called the Great Māhele [[mah-HAY-lay]] and resulted in much of the land being owned by the Big Five sugar companies. The Bayonet Constitution was forced upon this country's last king, David Kalakaua. For the point, name this Pacific kingdom which became the 50th U.S. state.
Answer: Hawai'i (

5786. This world leader’s legacy is mocked in a commercial that claimed his greatest action was introducing Pizza Hut to his country. The Gang of Eight kidnapped this leader during the August Putsch, following which the country he led collapsed. This leader met with a certain U.S. President in Reykjavik to negotiate missile reductions. For the point, identify this final leader of the Soviet Union who was notably told by Ronald Reagan to “tear down this wall."
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

5787. One site of this civilization, Dholavira, is located in the salt marsh of Kutch. A soapstone statue known as The King-Priest was located at one of this civilization's sites, which includes the earliest known public water tank in history, the Great Bath. Mortimer Wheeler mistakenly theorized that this civilization, which likely spoke a Dravidian language, was wiped out by an "Aryan" invasion. For the point, name this Bronze Age civilization with cities such as Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa, based on a namesake river.
Answer: Indus Valley Civilization (

5788. One of these vehicles sank off the coast of Scotland after a sailor on board failed to use its toilet mechanism properly, causing a leak that came in contact with its lithium battery. The First and Second "Happy Times" occurred due to these vessels' highly successful operations against merchant shipping in 1940 to 1942. For the point, name this type of German naval vessel that conducted unrestricted submarine warfare in the First and Second World Wars.
Answer: U-Boats (

5789. Alberto Korda took photograph of this man, a trained doctor, who responded to the disaster at a memorial service for the La Coubre explosion. This man described the need to rid his continent of the "Yankee-Friend" and how he met a Communist miner in his memoir The Motorcycle Diaries. After attempting to start a revolution in Bolivia, this man was killed with help from the CIA in 1967. For the point, name this Marxist revolutionary who was integral to the Cuban Revolution.
Answer: Ernesto "Che" Guevara (

5790. A group indigenous to this island plays a grouped kettle gong instrument called the talempong and performs a form of theater called randai. The Minangkabau originate from this island, whose Deli Serdang area surrounds the large city of Medan. The northern portion of this island, home to an intermittent insurgency against central government rule, is Aceh [[AH-chay]]. The Srivijaya Empire was ruled from Palembang on, for the point, what western Indonesian island?
Answer: Sumatra

5791. While fighting the Ottomans, Michael the Brave unified the three principalities which would form this country, and centuries later in 1859, Alexandru Cuza united a "Danubian" pair of them. After fighting Bulgaria in World War One, this country was awarded land from Hungary, but lost it in the Second Vienna Award after an uprising by Horia Sima's Iron Guard. For the point, name this country that united from Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania and was an Axis member during World War Two under Ion Antonescu [[EE-ohn ah-toh-NEH- skoo]].
Answer: Romania (

5792. The medieval Malla family created the Khasa Kingdom in this modern-day nation. This country's forces dealt major losses to British forces at Nalapani before signing the Treaty of Sugauli. In this nation, Crown Prince Dipendra [[dee-PEHN-drah]] orchestrated a 2001 massacre of ten members of the House of Gorkha, including his father and mother. Edmund Hillary summited Mount Everest with Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from, for the point, which mountainous South Asian country?
Answer: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal (

5793. One leader of this name feuded with his ally Valerius Flaccus [[FLAH-kus]] over the Oppian Law. Another leader of this name pioneered the use of the filibuster to force his rivals to choose between a triumph or a consulship. That leader of this name committed suicide at Utica [["you"-TEE-kah]] after the collapse of the Optimates [[op-tee-MAH-tehs]]. For the point, give this name shared by a “Younger” who opposed Julius Caesar and an “Elder” who ended all of his speeches with “Carthago Delenda Est”, or “Carthage must be destroyed!”
Answer: Cato (

5794. During this conflict, a lengthy canal crossing gave defenders enough time to ward off an attack at Calcinato. In that battle during this conflict, the Duc de Tallard [[tah-LAHR]] was defeated by a force partly led by a prince from the House of Savoy. The Grand Alliance fought during this conflict, which arose after Philip of Anjou was chosen to succeed Charles II. For the point, name this major European war ended by the Treaty of Utrecht.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession

5795. One king of this name died fighting the Battle of Sauchieburn [[soh-CHEE-burn]] against his son, another king of this name. A king of this name died while trying to invade a southern neighbor at the Battle of Flodden Field, and the last independent king of this name succeeded to the English throne on the death of Queen Elizabeth. For the point, give this name of six kings of Scotland and the first Stuart king of England.
Answer: James (

5796. In this city, a 16th-century priest put a statue of the Virgin Mary on trial for witchcraft and later burned it at the stake. The Imperial Russian army safely retreated from this city during the Battle of Jugla [[YOOG-luh]] after losing control of the Daugava waterway to the German Empire. This city, a historical archbishopric allied to the Livonian Order, was led by the first independent government in half a century by Ivars Godmanis. The Singing Revolution began in protest of Soviet construction in, for the point, what Latvian capital city?
Answer: Riga

5797. In this battle, David Chassé repulsed an elite unit with his Third Netherlands Division. This battle was fought across the farms of La Haye Sainte and Hougoumont. Part of this battle’s winning coalition had earlier lost the Battle of Ligny under the command of Gebhard von Blucher. This battle was the climactic event of the Hundred Days, which began when the loser of this battle escaped from Elba to lead the French army. For the point, name this battle in which the Duke of Wellington handed Napoleon his final defeat.
Answer: Battle of WaterlooSpring League

5798. Islamic rituals such as prayer five times a day were mixed with Buddhist idolatry in this nation's minority faith, Hoa Hao [[HWA HAW]]. Figures like novelist Victor Hugo and Saint Joan of Arc are worshipped in this nation's Cao Dai [["cow die"]] faith. Records show that 10th century Nestorians spread Christianity to this country while it was called "Annam." The Lunar New Year Tết Nguyên Đán [[TET WEN DAHN]] is traditionally celebrated in, for the point, what Southeast Asian nation's city of Hanoi?
Answer: Vietnam (

5799. A blue-grey wolf and a fallow doe legendarily birthed these people's first ancestor, Batachiqan [[bah-TAH-chee-CAHN]], along the Onan River. A princess of these people named Khutulun [[KOO-tah-loon]] supposedly earned over 10,000 horses from her suitors after defeating them in wrestling competitions, inspiring the myth of Turandot [[too-rahn-DOH]]. These people syncretized the Turkic sky god Tengri with Buddhist beliefs into a type of shamanism. For the point, name these people of the Asian steppes who included Kublai and Genghis Khan.
Answer: Mongolians (or Mongols

5800. During this period, the development of hanafuda playing cards resulted from the ban of Portuguese cards and gambling generally. The Satsuma Rebellion motivated the government during this period to pass the Keiō [[keh-EE-oh]] Reforms, a set of westernization policies which failed to prevent the Meiji Restoration. The term "Edo Period" is sometimes used to describe, for the point, which period of isolationism in Japan from the 17th to the 19th century?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (

5801. (The company Scherl Verlag published a propaganda paper for this organization known as Der Adler, or "The Eagle." Shortly before being promoted out of this military organization, Albert Kesselring approved the "Trans-Ural Project," which developed the Heinkel He 177. Hermann Göring led this military branch during World War Two, spearheading its operations, such as "The Blitz" of the British Isles. The aerial force of the Wehrmacht was, for the point, what military branch of the Third Reich?
Answer: Luftwaffe

5802. Imagined trips in Europe inspired by this historical event led to the Steve Reich [[RYSH]] opus Different Trains. During this event, Pavel Haas was made head director of the Theresienstadt [[teh-RAY-sehn-stahdt]] in preparation for a Red Cross visit. Wilfred Joseph's Requiem for the victims of this event is set to a Hebrew prayer known as the Kaddish. Krzysztof Penderecki wrote the "Auschwitz Oratorio" in reaction to, for the point, what genocide perpetrated by Nazi Germany?
Answer: Holocaust (

5803. This person’s adoption of the sarissa and creation of the phalanx revolutionized ancient warfare and aided in his conquest of neighboring polities. Those innovations also led to the success of this ruler's army in conflicts such as the Third Sacred War. A member of the Argead dynasty, this person cemented his dominance over Greece by establishing the League of Corinth. The orator Demosthenes warned repeatedly of the threat posed by, for the point, what Macedonian ruler, the father of Alexander the Great?
Answer: Philip II of Macedon (

5804. Philosopher Jürgen [[YUHR-gehn]] Habermas served as a member of this organization at the behest of his conservative father in the early 20th century. Artur Axmann led this organization, whose ranks filled out several armies during the battles of Seelow Heights. Hitler's last act outside of the Führerbunker was awarding Iron Crosses to 16 year old members of this organization. The League of German Girls acted as the female equivalent of, for the point, which Nazi organized children's organization?
Answer: Hitler Youth (

5805. This composer was commissioned to write a piece for a Red Cross benefit concert commemorating his country’s intervention in the Serbo-Turkish War. Another piece about a battle by this composer begins by quoting the hymn “O Lord, Save Thy People.” That piece by this composer quotes “La Marseillaise” to symbolize Napoleon’s invading army and culminates with sixteen cannon blasts. For the point, identify this Russian composer of Marche Slave [[marsh-SLAHV]] and the 1812 Overture.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky [[chy-KOF-skee]]

5806. In retaliation for this country deploying mines, the U.S. organized Operations Nimble Archer and Praying Mantis to target this country's oil platforms. During a war between this country and its western neighbor, Henry Kissinger wondered if "they both can't lose." The USS Vincennes [[VIHN-sehns]] shot down a passenger jet from this country, which was the source of funds used to evade the Boland Amendment elsewhere. For the point, name this country that was the central nation in the scandalous "Contra Affair" of the Reagan and Bush era.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran (or Jomhuri-ye Eslāmi-ye Irān

5807. Near the start of a visit to this place, the narrator meets Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta, two nobles from Ravenna whose affair and deaths inspired "the Kiss" art motif. Jason, Caiaphas, and Pope Nicholas III all appear in the Malebolge location in this place, before Virgil guides the narrator to Brutus, Judas, and Lucifer at its lowest levels. For the point, name this place visited in the first third of the Divine Comedy by Dante.
Answer: Hell (or Inferno)Spring League

5808. A New York community named for this historical city was a farming colony for free African-Americans due to it being on highly arable land. Joseph Joffree's late 19th century conquest of this city led to its coverage in western media by Felix Dubois [[doo-BWAH]], who claimed it had "unimpressive buildings" outside of the University of Sankore. While searching for the source of the Niger, Alexander Gordon Laing was the first European to reach this city, but was killed weeks later by Tuareg raiders. The capital of the medieval Mali Empire was, for the point, which city?
Answer: Timbuktu (

5809. This dynasty successfully resolved the Ili [[EE-lee]] crisis by negotiating the Treaty of St. Petersburg with Russia. The Self-Strengthening Movement was pushed by this dynasty following the burning of the Old Summer Palace. A commissioner under this dynasty, Lin Zexu [[ZEH-SHOO]] , issued a letter to Queen Victoria condemning the opium trade. Near the end of this dynasty, "dowager empress" Cixi [[SEE-SHE]] held effective power. For the point, name this final imperial dynasty of China.
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (

5810. Members of the 18th-century European aristocracy participated in a sport involving tossing these animals while dressed up as heroes from Greco-Roman myth. It's not weasels, but a Norman king with a nickname derived from this animal conquered much of southern Italy and the island of Sicily in the 11th century. Francis Marion was dubbed the "Swamp" [this animal] during the American Revolution, and Erwin Rommel was called the "Desert" [this animal]. For the point, identify this canid that often provides a nickname to wily historical figures.
Answer: Foxes (or Vulpes

5811. An 1874 courthouse riot in this country was led by Hulu, the leader of the Emmaites faction of Queen Emma. George Anson Byron, the cousin of Lord Byron, delivered two monarchs back to this country before mapping Rabbit Island. A land redistribution scheme in this country was called the Great Māhele [[mah-HAY-lay]] and resulted in much of the land being owned by the Big Five sugar companies. The Bayonet Constitution was forced upon this country's last king, David Kalakaua. For the point, name this Pacific kingdom which became the 50th U.S. state.
Answer: Hawai'i (

5812. This world leader’s legacy is mocked in a commercial that claimed his greatest action was introducing Pizza Hut to his country. The Gang of Eight kidnapped this leader during the August Putsch, following which the country he led collapsed. This leader met with a certain U.S. President in Reykjavik to negotiate missile reductions. For the point, identify this final leader of the Soviet Union who was notably told by Ronald Reagan to “tear down this wall."
Answer: Mikhail Gorbachev

5813. One site of this civilization, Dholavira, is located in the salt marsh of Kutch. A soapstone statue known as The King-Priest was located at one of this civilization's sites, which includes the earliest known public water tank in history, the Great Bath. Mortimer Wheeler mistakenly theorized that this civilization, which likely spoke a Dravidian language, was wiped out by an "Aryan" invasion. For the point, name this Bronze Age civilization with cities such as Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa, based on a namesake river.
Answer: Indus Valley Civilization (

5814. This man was sued by Thomas Zaremba in a case that rejected the concept of palimony in Texas. Irl Allison established a contest named for this man in Fort Worth. A Time magazine cover proclaimed this man "The Texan Who Conquered Russia" following a performance that included Rachmaninoff's third piano concerto. For the point, name this American pianist who won a stunning upset in the 1958 International Tchaikovsky Competition.
Answer: Van Cliburn (or Harvey Lavan Cliburn, Jr.)Spring League

5815. Alberto Korda took photograph of this man, a trained doctor, who responded to the disaster at a memorial service for the La Coubre explosion. This man described the need to rid his continent of the "Yankee-Friend" and how he met a Communist miner in his memoir The Motorcycle Diaries. After attempting to start a revolution in Bolivia, this man was killed with help from the CIA in 1967. For the point, name this Marxist revolutionary who was integral to the Cuban Revolution.
Answer: Ernesto "Che" Guevara (

5816. A group indigenous to this island plays a grouped kettle gong instrument called the talempong and performs a form of theater called randai. The lava dome of Sinabung collapsed and emitted a five-kilometer ash plume on this island in 2021. The Minangkabau originate from this island, whose Deli Serdang area surrounds the large city of Medan. The northern portion of this island, home to an intermittent insurgency against central government rule, is Aceh [[AH-chay]]. The Srivijaya Empire was ruled from Palembang on, for the point, what western Indonesian island?
Answer: Sumatra

5817. While fighting the Ottomans, Michael the Brave unified the three principalities which would form this country, and centuries later in 1859, Alexandru Cuza united a "Danubian" pair of them. After fighting Bulgaria in World War One, this country was awarded land from Hungary, but lost it in the Second Vienna Award after an uprising by Horia Sima's Iron Guard. For the point, name this country that united from Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania and was an Axis member during World War Two under Ion Antonescu [[EE-ohn ah-toh-NEH- skoo]].
Answer: Romania (

5818. The medieval Malla family created the Khasa Kingdom in this modern-day nation. This country's forces dealt major losses to British forces at Nalapani before signing the Treaty of Sugauli. In this nation, Crown Prince Dipendra [[dee-PEHN-drah]] orchestrated a 2001 massacre of ten members of the House of Gorkha, including his father and mother. Edmund Hillary summited Mount Everest with Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from, for the point, which mountainous South Asian country?
Answer: Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal (

5819. One leader of this name feuded with his ally Valerius Flaccus [[FLAH-kus]] over the Oppian Law. Another leader of this name pioneered the use of the filibuster to force his rivals to choose between a triumph or a consulship. That leader of this name committed suicide at Utica [["you"-TEE-kah]] after the collapse of the Optimates [[op-tee-MAH-tehs]]. For the point, give this name shared by a “Younger” who opposed Julius Caesar and an “Elder” who ended all of his speeches with “Carthago Delenda Est”, or “Carthage must be destroyed!”
Answer: Cato (

5820. During this conflict, a lengthy canal crossing gave defenders enough time to ward off an attack at Calcinato. A skull found at a battle during this conflict appears in an anti-war poem by Robert Southey. In that battle during this conflict, the Duc de Tallard [[tah-LAHR]] was defeated by a force partly led by a prince from the House of Savoy. The Grand Alliance fought during this conflict, which arose after Philip of Anjou was chosen to succeed Charles II. For the point, name this major European war ended by the Treaty of Utrecht.
Answer: War of the Spanish Succession

5821. One king of this name died fighting the Battle of Sauchieburn [[soh-CHEE-burn]] against his son, another king of this name. The massive cannon Mons Meg was given as a gift to the second king of this name. A king of this name died while trying to invade a southern neighbor at the Battle of Flodden Field, and the last independent king of this name succeeded to the English throne on the death of Queen Elizabeth. For the point, give this name of six kings of Scotland and the first Stuart king of England.
Answer: James (

5822. In this city, a 16th-century priest put a statue of the Virgin Mary on trial for witchcraft and later burned it at the stake. The Imperial Russian army safely retreated from this city during the Battle of Jugla [[YOOG-luh]] after losing control of the Daugava waterway to the German Empire. This city, a historical archbishopric allied to the Livonian Order, was led by the first independent government in half a century by Ivars Godmanis. The Singing Revolution began in protest of Soviet construction in, for the point, what Latvian capital city?
Answer: Riga

5823. In this battle, David Chassé repulsed an elite unit with his Third Netherlands Division. This battle was fought across the farms of La Haye Sainte and Hougoumont. Part of this battle’s winning coalition had earlier lost the Battle of Ligny under the command of Gebhard von Blucher. This battle was the climactic event of the Hundred Days, which began when the loser of this battle escaped from Elba to lead the French army. For the point, name this battle in which the Duke of Wellington handed Napoleon his final defeat.
Answer: Battle of WaterlooSpring League

5824. This man's lawsuit was sponsored by the Blow family and argued before the Supreme Court by Montgomery Blair. This man's filing pointed out his four-year residence in the state of Illinois and the Wisconsin territory. Roger Taney's [[TAH-nees]] ruling in this man's case found an absence of "rights which the white man was bound to respect." For the point, name this plaintiff in an 1857 Supreme Court case against John Sanford that ended in a strongly pro-slavery decision.
Answer: Dred Scott (

5825. A blue-grey wolf and a fallow doe legendarily birthed these people's first ancestor, Batachiqan [[bah-TAH-chee-CAHN]], along the Onan River. A princess of these people named Khutulun [[KOO-tah-loon]] supposedly earned over 10,000 horses from her suitors after defeating them in wrestling competitions, inspiring the myth of Turandot [[too-rahn-DOH]]. These people syncretized the Turkic sky god Tengri with Buddhist beliefs into a type of shamanism. For the point, name these people of the Asian steppes who included Kublai and Genghis Khan.
Answer: Mongolians (or Mongols

5826. This period was partially fueled by students of William Tennent at the Log College. Richard Bushman claims that the divide between the "Old Lights" and "New Lights" in this period led to political factionalism in Connecticut. In an oration from this period, the speaker compares the salvation of man to holding a spider over a fire. Jonathan Edwards gave his "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God" sermon during, for the point, what period of religious revival in the 1730s and 40s?
Answer: First Great Awakening (

5827. (The company Scherl Verlag published a propaganda paper for this organization known as Der Adler, or "The Eagle." Shortly before being promoted out of this military organization, Albert Kesselring approved the "Trans-Ural Project," which developed the Heinkel He 177. Hermann Göring led this military branch during World War Two, spearheading its operations, such as "The Blitz" of the British Isles. The aerial force of the Wehrmacht was, for the point, what military branch of the Third Reich?
Answer: Luftwaffe

5828. Imagined trips in Europe inspired by this historical event led to the Steve Reich [[RYSH]] opus Different Trains. During this event, Pavel Haas was made head director of the Theresienstadt [[teh-RAY-sehn-stahdt]] in preparation for a Red Cross visit. Wilfred Joseph's Requiem for the victims of this event is set to a Hebrew prayer known as the Kaddish. Krzysztof Penderecki wrote the "Auschwitz Oratorio" in reaction to, for the point, what genocide perpetrated by Nazi Germany?
Answer: Holocaust (

5829. This person’s adoption of the sarissa and creation of the phalanx revolutionized ancient warfare and aided in his conquest of neighboring polities. Those innovations also led to the success of this ruler's army in conflicts such as the Third Sacred War. A member of the Argead dynasty, this person cemented his dominance over Greece by establishing the League of Corinth. The orator Demosthenes warned repeatedly of the threat posed by, for the point, what Macedonian ruler, the father of Alexander the Great?
Answer: Philip II of Macedon (

5830. Philosopher Jürgen [[YUHR-gehn]] Habermas served as a member of this organization at the behest of his conservative father in the early 20th century. Artur Axmann led this organization, whose ranks filled out several armies during the battles of Seelow Heights. Hitler's last act outside of the Führerbunker was awarding Iron Crosses to 16 year old members of this organization. The League of German Girls acted as the female equivalent of, for the point, which Nazi organized children's organization?
Answer: Hitler Youth (

5831. This composer was commissioned to write a piece for a Red Cross benefit concert commemorating his country’s intervention in the Serbo-Turkish War. Another piece about a battle by this composer begins by quoting the hymn “O Lord, Save Thy People.” That piece by this composer quotes “La Marseillaise” to symbolize Napoleon’s invading army and culminates with sixteen cannon blasts. For the point, identify this Russian composer of Marche Slave [[marsh-SLAHV]] and the 1812 Overture.
Answer: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky [[chy-KOF-skee]]

5832. In retaliation for this country deploying mines, the U.S. organized Operations Nimble Archer and Praying Mantis to target this country's oil platforms. During a war between this country and its western neighbor, Henry Kissinger wondered if "they both can't lose." The USS Vincennes [[VIHN-sehns]] shot down a passenger jet from this country, which was the source of funds used to evade the Boland Amendment elsewhere. For the point, name this country that was the central nation in the scandalous "Contra Affair" of the Reagan and Bush era.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Iran (or Jomhuri-ye Eslāmi-ye Irān

5833. Early Protestant reformer John Wycliff used this term while describing the residence of the Biblical Levite tribe in his work Trialogus. Levitt & Sons built one of the first examples of these communities in Long Island, New York to service World War Two veterans returning from service. First coined by Cicero to describe large villas on the outskirt of Rome, for the point, what term describes developed commercial and residential areas immediately outside of a city?
Answer: Suburbs (

5834. A New York community named for this historical city was a farming colony for free African-Americans due to it being on highly arable land. Joseph Joffree's late 19th century conquest of this city led to its coverage in western media by Felix Dubois [[doo-BWAH]], who claimed it had "unimpressive buildings" outside of the University of Sankore. While searching for the source of the Niger, Alexander Gordon Laing was the first European to reach this city, but was killed weeks later by Tuareg raiders. The capital of the medieval Mali Empire was, for the point, which city?
Answer: Timbuktu (

5835. This dynasty successfully resolved the Ili [[EE-lee]] crisis by negotiating the Treaty of St. Petersburg with Russia. The Self-Strengthening Movement was pushed by this dynasty following the burning of the Old Summer Palace. A commissioner under this dynasty, Lin Zexu [[ZEH-SHOO]] , issued a letter to Queen Victoria condemning the opium trade. Near the end of this dynasty, "dowager empress" Cixi [[SEE-SHE]] held effective power. For the point, name this final imperial dynasty of China.
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (

5836. Near the start of a visit to this place, the narrator meets Francesca da Rimini and Paolo Malatesta, two nobles from Ravenna whose affair and deaths inspired "the Kiss" art motif. Jason, Caiaphas, and Pope Nicholas III all appear in the Malebolge location in this place, before Virgil guides the narrator to Brutus, Judas, and Lucifer at its lowest levels. For the point, name this place visited in the first third of the Divine Comedy by Dante.
Answer: Hell (or Inferno)

5837. Members of the 18th-century European aristocracy participated in a sport involving tossing these animals while dressed up as heroes from Greco-Roman myth. It's not weasels, but a Norman king with a nickname derived from this animal conquered much of southern Italy and the island of Sicily in the 11th century. Francis Marion was dubbed the "Swamp" [this animal] during the American Revolution, and Erwin Rommel was called the "Desert" [this animal]. For the point, identify this canid that often provides a nickname to wily historical figures.
Answer: Foxes (or Vulpes

5838. This modern U.S. state passed the first set of Animal Protection Laws in their namesake "Body of Liberties." Charles II declared this future state's Hull Mint, founded by a member of its Quincy merchant family, illegitimate after it made coins of local figures. This state's governor, James Bowdoin [[BOH-duhn]], encouraged John Adams to author the Riot Act, allowing the government to suspend habeus corpus during Shays' Rebellion in its western region. For the point, name this New England state which experienced the Boston Massacre.
Answer: Massachu

5839. Islamic rituals such as prayer five times a day were mixed with Buddhist idolatry in this nation's minority faith, Hoa Hao [[HWA HAW]]. Figures like novelist Victor Hugo and Saint Joan of Arc are worshipped in this nation's Cao Dai [["cow die"]] faith. Records show that 10th century Nestorians spread Christianity to this country while it was called "Annam." The Lunar New Year Tết Nguyên Đán [[TET WEN DAHN]] is traditionally celebrated in, for the point, what Southeast Asian nation's city of Hanoi?
Answer: Vietnam (

5840. One of these vehicles sank off the coast of Scotland after a sailor on board failed to use its toilet mechanism properly, causing a leak that came in contact with its lithium battery. Shortly after sinking four barges off the coast of Orleans, these ships bombarded that New Jersey town before two U.S. Navy planes caused them to retreat. The First and Second "Happy Times" occurred due to these vessels' highly successful operations against merchant shipping in 1940 to 1942. For the point, name this type of German naval vessel that conducted unrestricted submarine warfare in the First and Second World Wars.
Answer: U-Boats (

5841. During this period, the development of hanafuda playing cards resulted from the ban of Portuguese cards and gambling generally. The Satsuma Rebellion motivated the government during this period to pass the Keiō [[keh-EE-oh]] Reforms, a set of westernization policies which failed to prevent the Meiji Restoration. The term "Edo Period" is sometimes used to describe, for the point, which period of isolationism in Japan from the 17th to the 19th century?
Answer: Tokugawa Shogunate (

5842. This monarch commissioned the "Frog Service" from Josiah Wedgewood. The Yaik Cossacks rebelled against this monarch under the leadership of Yemelyan Pugachev [[yeh- mehl-YAHN poo-gah-CHOFF]]. This monarch signed the Treaty of Jassy [[YAH-see]] with the Ottoman Empire, which was negotiated by the founder of Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet, Grigori Potemkin. This widow of Peter III corresponded with Denis Diderot as an "enlightened despot." For the point, name this empress of Russia from 1762 to 1796.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II; or Sophie of Anhalt-Zerbst

5843. A ruler of this family formally surrendered and abdicated to a joint UK-USSR invasion of his nation in Operation Countenance. The formal deposition of the last ruler of the Qajar [[kah-JAR]] family while abroad on a European tour led to the appointment of this dynasty's first ruler. A member of this dynasty created a one-party state in the mid 1970s under the Rastakhiz [[rah-STAH-"keys"]] party, part of a reform package known as the "White Revolution." The Islamic Revolution overthrew, for the point, which dynasty of Persian shahs in the 20th century?
Answer: Pahlavi Dynasty

5844. In this film, after several members of the Highlanders Regiment seek refuge in a beached trawler, they are almost drowned when an enemy uses the vessel for target practice. Tom Hardy's character sets fire to his Spitfire before being captured by the Germans at the end of this film, which depicts Operation Dynamo. For the point, name this 2017 Christopher Nolan about the Allied evacuation from a namesake French port during World War Two.
Answer: Dunkirk

5845. This philosophy’s Three Obediences and Four Virtues prompted criticism from later scholars. A divine moral will was denied in "The Discussion of Heaven" chapter from a namesake book by this philosophy's scholar Xunzi. Emperor Shi Huangdi rejected this school of thought and adopted Legalism during the Qin [[CHIN]] Dynasty. Mencius argued that this philosophy regards human nature as ‘intrinsically benevolent’ in his explanation of the Analects. For the point, identify this ancient Chinese school of thought named for a sage of the Spring and Autumn period.
Answer: Confucianism (or Kǒngjiào

5846. The imprisonment and death of Pausanias prompted this entity to institute Hellenotamiae [[he-LEE-noh-tah-MOY]], public magistrates who collected tribute from fellow members. Barely escaping to Cyrene, a force sent by this entity was reduced after the battles at Memphis and Prosoptis in an attempt to support the Egyptian rebellion of Inaros. This league, which was formed after the victory at Plataea, was broken up at the conclusion of the Peloponnesian War. For the point, name this "League" which effectively became the "Athenian Empire" by the 450s B.C.E, named for a Cyclades island.
Answer: Delian League (

5847. Albert the Bear served as margrave of this state, then known as the Northern March, after successfully crusading against the Wendish people in the 12th century. A World War Two-era "Conference" named for this state's capital involved Harry Truman, Clement Atlee and Joseph Stalin planning how to administer occupied Germany. Frederick III united a joint realm between this state and Prussia into a kingdom. The state of Berlin is entirely surrounded by, for the point, what formerly-Soviet occupied German state governed from Potsdam?
Answer: Brandenburg (

5848. Following a loss to Napoleon, a large contingent of this group was granted residency in Russia by Emperor Paul I, while others from this group rejected a Swedish offer of sovereignty over Gotland. After the fall of the County of Tripoli, this group moved to Rhodes, before an Ottoman invasion forced them to relocate to Malta, where they won the last major victory for a group of knights in 1565. For the point, name this order of knights whose name derives from their role as guardians of a medical center for Christian pilgrims in Jerusalem.
Answer: Knights Hospitaller (

5849. This politician, who paid off George Floyd's daughter's college tuition, received an endorsement from a man who'd previously endorsed Andrew Yang. Elon Musk endorsed this politician, who alleged that the Democratic Party was intentionally giving the Black community the birth control "Plan B" to suppress their votes. This politician, who ran alongside Wyoming preacher Michelle Tidball, represented the "Birthday Party." For the point, name this 2020 Presidential candidate and rapper whose campaign advisors included his then wife, Kim Kardashian.
Answer: Kanye West (

5850. This man's spouse Nadezhda [[nah-des-DAH]] edited the newspaper Iskra and fronted the Central Committee while in exile in France. This man, who at one point used the pseudonym "A Reader," was allowed to return from Switzerland after the February Revolution. With worker support, this man ousted the Provisional Government of Alexander Kerensky from Petrograd after seizing the Winter Palace while supported by his Bolshevik militia. For the point, name this leader of the October Revolution, the first leader of the Soviet Union.
Answer: Vladimir Lenin (

5851. After learning about this conflict, Eoin [["Owen"]] MacNeill placed a last-minute newscast advising people not to join the Cumann na mBan [[na MON]] and James Connolly’s citizen army in this conflict. Following Patrick Pearse’s surrender to General Lowe to end this conflict, sixteen rebel leaders were executed. This uprising saw the occupation of the General Post Office and declaration of a republic. For the point, name this armed insurrection of Irish republicans that took place during an eponymous week.
Answer: Easter Rising (or Easter Rebellion

5852. With Shah Narseh, this ruler signed the Peace of Nisibis, giving his empire suzerainty over the kingdom of Iberia in the Caucasus. This ruler ordered the ineffective "Edict on the Maximum Prices" following a series of currency debasements during the Crisis of the Third Century. With his co-ruler, Maximian, this man ordered a massacre of the "20,000 Martyrs of Nicomedia," part of larger set of Christian persecutions named for this emperor. For the point, name this Roman emperor of Greek descent who established the Tetrarchy.
Answer: Diocletian (or Gaius Aurelius Valerius Diocletianus

5853. A notable catechism that came out of this event was developed primarily by Carlo Borromeo. This council authorized Paul III to begin developing what would become the Gregorian Calendar. This council officially reaffirmed the traditional books of the Bible and developed a namesake mass that would be in use for the next four hundred years. Denouncing the concept of "justification by faith alone," for the point, what Church council condemned the teachings of Martin Luther and began the Counter-Reformation?
Answer: Council of Trent (or Concilium Tridentinum

5854. King Genseric strategically married his son to the daughter of king of these people, but later had her ears and nose mutilated for plotting against the Vandal prince, resulting in the siege of Barcelona. A king of these people, Reccared I, abandoned orthodox Christianity for Arianism as the state faith. A king of this people, Theodoric I, was instrumental in assisting Flavius Aetius's [[AY-shus-es]] victory over the Huns at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. The 410 sack of Rome was perpetrated by, for the point, which Gothic people under King Alaric I?
Answer: Visigoths (

5855. This city's Mamelles hills are the site of the African Renaissance Monument, while the village of Mbodiene outside this capital city will be the site of a Wakanda-inspired development named for the singer Akon. Leopold Sedar Senghor airport serves this city, where the House of Slaves on Gorée Island now memorializes the Atlantic Slave trade. Originally founded by the Portuguese near the Cap-Vert peninsula, for the point, what Wolof and French-speaking city is the capital of Senegal?
Answer: Dakar (or Ndakaaru)

5856. Jeb Bush gave a sword once owned by this man to Marco Rubio, in reference to a Bush family joke about "unleashing" this man. After this man's regime was targeted in the February 28 Incident, he launched a "White Terror" against dissidents. This man was kidnapped along with his top generals in the 1936 Xi'an [[SHEE-ahn]] Incident in order to force him to ally with the Communists against Japan. For the point, name this leader of the Kuomintang [[gwoh-min-DONG]] who lost the Chinese Civil War and headed the government of Taiwan until his 1975 death.
Answer: Chiang Kai-shek (or Chiang Chieh-shih; or Chiang Chung-cheng; or Jiang Jieshi)

5857. Work done directly for this series of missions led to the invention of "Development Before the Fact" programming and the Universal Systems Language. Electrical engineer Judith Love Cohen contributed to these missions while giving birth. Margaret Hamilton's MIT Instrumentation Laboratory created the key software for these missions, whose ill-fated 1970 entry's emergency return path was calculated by Katherine Johnson. For the point, name this series of missions whose eleventh instance landed the first astronauts on the Moon.
Answer: Apollo program (or Project Apollo)

5858. For the last three decades of the 20th century, this country was governed by a "New Order" that collapsed following the Asian Financial Crisis and sweeping anti-Chinese riots. B.J. Habibie led the "Reform Era" of this nation, which attempted to liberalize the regime following the resignation of Suharto. This nation gained independence under Sukarno following the Japanese occupation of the East Indies. For the point, name this Asian nation whose Dutch capital, Batavia, was renamed Jakarta.
Answer: Republic of Indonesia (

5859. Jerzy Kulczycki [[KUL-shitz-kee]] opened one of the first cafes following the first of these events using coffee beans taken from the losing side. The 70-year old Nicholas, Count of Salm was lauded for commanding the winning side in one of these events, which was conducted by the forces of Suleiman the Magnificent. A charge by the winged hussars of John III Sobieski [[soh-bee-YETZ-kee]] ended the second of these events. For the point, name these two events in which Ottoman forces attempted to take the Austrian capital.
Answer: (Ottoman) Sieges of Vienna (

5860. After this man's 1964 arrest, he was slapped by the prime minister of his country, Hasan Ali Mansur, for refusing to cease his criticism of the government while working as a seminary teacher. In his first months in power, this man confronted political opposition by stating, "I shall kick their teeth in. I appoint the government." That followed fourteen years of exile for this man, including time in cities like Najaf and Paris. For the point, name this leader of the Islamic Revolution of 1979, the first Supreme Leader of Iran.
Answer: Ayatollah Khomeini (or Ruholla Khomeini

5861. In this nation, the anti-immigrant rhetoric of politician Pim Fortuyn [[for-TOYN]] led to his assassination during its 2002 general election. A ban on all public mosques and printings of the Koran were called for by this nation's far right faction, the Party for Freedom. On the holiday of Koningsdag [[KOH-nings-dahk]] in 2013, the reigning Queen Beatrix abdicated in favor of her son Willem-Alexander, the head of the House of Orange-Nassau. Mark Rutte [[ROO-teh]] leads, for the point, which Benelux nation governed from The Hague?
Answer: Netherlands (

5862. One of the oldest of these edifices in Maruoka [[[[mah-ROO-oh-KAH]] was subject to hitobashira, or human sacrifices by its foundation. Intentionally built a day's march apart, a network of these buildings existed between Busan and Seoul during the Chongyu War. The outbreak of the Ōnin War between competing daimyos accelerated the pace of construction of these military buildings. Shiro is the Japanese word for, for the point, what type of stone fortress also common in Medieval Europe?
Answer: Japanese castles (

5863. A Magonid royal with this epithet supposedly encountered a hairy tribe of savage men known as the Gorillai, who lend their name to the modern ape. That man with this nickname, Hanno, may have reached as far south as Gabon on a voyage that departed from Carthaginian territory in Iberia. Another man with this epithet funded the construction of a fleet of caravels, which led to the colonization of the Madeiras and the Azores. For the point, give this nickname held by a Prince of Portugal named Henry who encouraged 15th-century Portuguese exploration.
Answer: The Navigator (

5864. On the DR 284 stone at the Hunnestad Monument, Ole Worm observed an image of one of these creatures holding two snakes and riding a wolf. That image is usually identified as Hyrrokin, a female example of these creatures who assisted in the funeral of Baldr. Another of these creatures, Utgard-Loki, challenged Thor to lift a cat and drink from a cup. The trickster god, Loki, was the son of one of these creatures, some of whom were believed to live in a realm of frost. For the point, name these creatures attested to in Norse poems.
Answer: (Frost) Giants (

5865. Use of this metric for placing students of color in EMR-type classes was largely barred in California by the case Larry P v. Riles. Stephen Jay Gould denounced attempts to singularly measure this metric in The Mismeasure of Man. Generations tend to perform better on tests evaluating this metric over time according to the Flynn effect. Robert Yerkes was hired to develop a method for the Army to take this metric in recruits. For the point, name this metric that can be measured on the Stanford-Binet scale, a "quotient" for which rates 90 to 109 as the average person's capability.
Answer: Intelligence (or Intelligence Quotient

5866. A group of fisherman and illegal wood gatherers were massacred on this country’s Christie Island. This country’s namesake “Way to Socialism” was opposed by a number of university students in a protest named for its occurrence on August 8, 1988. The State Peace and Development Council was the military government of this country where the National League for Democracy was led by a daughter of a certain revolutionary. For the point, name this country whose leaders have included Aung San Suu Kyi [[ON SAWN SOO CHEE]].
Answer: Myanmar (or Republic of the Union of Myanmar

5867. During this man's administration, blackmarketers named vory y zakone operated as semi-legal criminal syndicates in his nation. After many of his party members voted negatively of his leadership at the 17th Central Committee, this leader pointed an unloaded Mosin-Nagant rifle at the crowd. During the so-called "Period of Yezhov," this leader conducted show trials of men like Mikhail Bukharin and other purported "Trotskyites." For the point, name this dictator of the USSR who ordered the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany.
Answer: Joseph Stalin (or Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin

5868. This monarch commissioned the "Frog Service" from Josiah Wedgewood. The Yaik Cossacks rebelled against this monarch under the leadership of Yemelyan Pugachev [[yeh- mehl-YAHN poo-gah-CHOFF]]. This monarch signed the Treaty of Jassy [[YAH-see]] with the Ottoman Empire, which was negotiated by the founder of Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet, Grigori Potemkin. This widow of Peter III corresponded with Denis Diderot as an "enlightened despot." For the point, name this empress of Russia from 1762 to 1796.
Answer: Catherine the Great (or Catherine II; or Sophie of Anhalt-Zerbst

5869. A ruler of this family formally surrendered and abdicated to a joint UK-USSR invasion of his nation in Operation Countenance. The formal deposition of the last ruler of the Qajar [[kah-JAR]] family while abroad on a European tour led to the appointment of this dynasty's first ruler. A member of this dynasty created a one-party state in the mid 1970s under the Rastakhiz [[rah-STAH-"keys"]] party, part of a reform package known as the "White Revolution." The Islamic Revolution overthrew, for the point, which dynasty of Persian shahs in the 20th century?
Answer: Pahlavi Dynasty

5870. In this film, after several members of the Highlanders Regiment seek refuge in a beached trawler, they are almost drowned when an enemy uses the vessel for target practice. The Moonstone rescues several people from a sunken minesweeper in this film, as well as the pilot Collins, played by Jack Lowden. Tom Hardy's character sets fire to his Spitfire before being captured by the Germans at the end of this film, which depicts Operation Dynamo. For the point, name this 2017 Christopher Nolan about the Allied evacuation from a namesake French port during World War Two.
Answer: Dunkirk

5871. David III Bagrat reinforced a rebellion against this man's rule perpetrated by the general Bardas Phokas [[FOH-kas]]. This "purple-born" emperor likely had his co-ruler, John, poisoned upon his return from a campaign against the Abbasids. The conversion of the Rus occurred after this man offered his sister, Anna, in marriage to Vladimir the Great. The blinding of the majority of Tsar Samuel's army led to, for the point, which Byzantine emperor earning the epithet "Bulgar-slayer?"
Answer: Basil the Bulgar Slayer (or Basileios ho Boulgaroktonos

5872. The imprisonment and death of Pausanias prompted this entity to institute Hellenotamiae [[he-LEE-noh-tah-MOY]], public magistrates who collected tribute from fellow members. Barely escaping to Cyrene, a force sent by this entity was reduced after the battles at Memphis and Prosoptis in an attempt to support the Egyptian rebellion of Inaros. This league, which was formed after the victory at Plataea, was broken up at the conclusion of the Peloponnesian War. For the point, name this "League" which effectively became the "Athenian Empire" by the 450s B.C.E, named for a Cyclades island.
Answer: Delian League (

5873. Albert the Bear served as margrave of this state, then known as the Northern March, after successfully crusading against the Wendish people in the 12th century. A World War Two-era "Conference" named for this state's capital involved Harry Truman, Clement Atlee and Joseph Stalin planning how to administer occupied Germany. Frederick III united a joint realm between this state and Prussia into a kingdom. The state of Berlin is entirely surrounded by, for the point, what formerly-Soviet occupied German state governed from Potsdam?
Answer: Brandenburg (

5874. Following a loss to Napoleon, a large contingent of this group was granted residency in Russia by Emperor Paul I, while others from this group rejected a Swedish offer of sovereignty over Gotland. After the fall of the County of Tripoli, this group moved to Rhodes, before an Ottoman invasion forced them to relocate to Malta, where they won the last major victory for a group of knights in 1565. For the point, name this order of knights whose name derives from their role as guardians of a medical center for Christian pilgrims in Jerusalem.
Answer: Knights Hospitaller (

5875. The Plattsburg Movement taught certain skills in anticipation of this policy decision, which was also the subject of the Preparedness Movement. Public relations efforts in favor of this decision were managed by the Creel Committee. This large policy decision was defended in public speeches by the Four Minute Men, who also solicited Liberty Loans. The publication of the Zimmermann Telegram and lingering anger over the sinking of the Lusitania led to, for the point, what 1917 decision to join a European conflict?
Answer: The United

5876. This leader tried to ease tensions by granting money to Maynooth College. This leader’s subordinate Richard Pakenham negotiated the Oregon boundary dispute. Daniel O’Connell challenged this leader to a duel for opposing Catholic emancipation. This leader wrote the Tamworth Manifesto, forming the principles of the Conservative Party, and repealed the Corn Laws in the wake of the Irish Potato Famine. For the point, name this prime minister who created London’s Metropolitan Police Force.
Answer: Robert Peel

5877. After learning about this conflict, Eoin [["Owen"]] MacNeill placed a last-minute newscast advising people not to join the Cumann na mBan [[na MON]] and James Connolly’s citizen army in this conflict. Following Patrick Pearse’s surrender to General Lowe to end this conflict, sixteen rebel leaders were executed. This uprising saw the occupation of the General Post Office and declaration of a republic. For the point, name this armed insurrection of Irish republicans that took place during an eponymous week.
Answer: Easter Rising (or Easter Rebellion

5878. With Shah Narseh, this ruler signed the Peace of Nisibis, giving his empire suzerainty over the kingdom of Iberia in the Caucasus. This ruler ordered the ineffective "Edict on the Maximum Prices" following a series of currency debasements during the Crisis of the Third Century. With his co-ruler, Maximian, this man ordered a massacre of the "20,000 Martyrs of Nicomedia," part of larger set of Christian persecutions named for this emperor. For the point, name this Roman emperor of Greek descent who established the Tetrarchy.
Answer: Diocletian (or Gaius Aurelius Valerius Diocletianus

5879. A notable catechism that came out of this event was developed primarily by Carlo Borromeo. This council authorized Paul III to begin developing what would become the Gregorian Calendar. This council officially reaffirmed the traditional books of the Bible and developed a namesake mass that would be in use for the next four hundred years. Denouncing the concept of "justification by faith alone," for the point, what Church council condemned the teachings of Martin Luther and began the Counter-Reformation?
Answer: Council of Trent (or Concilium Tridentinum

5880. King Genseric strategically married his son to the daughter of king of these people, but later had her ears and nose mutilated for plotting against the Vandal prince, resulting in the siege of Barcelona. A king of these people, Reccared I, abandoned orthodox Christianity for Arianism as the state faith. A king of this people, Theodoric I, was instrumental in assisting Flavius Aetius's [[AY-shus-es]] victory over the Huns at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. The 410 sack of Rome was perpetrated by, for the point, which Gothic people under King Alaric I?
Answer: Visigoths (

5881. This city's Mamelles hills are the site of the African Renaissance Monument, while the village of Mbodiene outside this capital city will be the site of a Wakanda-inspired development named for the singer Akon. Leopold Sedar Senghor airport serves this city, where the House of Slaves on Gorée Island now memorializes the Atlantic Slave trade. Originally founded by the Portuguese near the Cap-Vert peninsula, for the point, what Wolof and French-speaking city is the capital of Senegal?
Answer: Dakar (or Ndakaaru)

5882. Jeb Bush gave a sword once owned by this man to Marco Rubio, in reference to a Bush family joke about "unleashing" this man. After this man's regime was targeted in the February 28 Incident, he launched a "White Terror" against dissidents. This man was kidnapped along with his top generals in the 1936 Xi'an [[SHEE-ahn]] Incident in order to force him to ally with the Communists against Japan. For the point, name this leader of the Kuomintang [[gwoh-min-DONG]] who lost the Chinese Civil War and headed the government of Taiwan until his 1975 death.
Answer: Chiang Kai-shek (or Chiang Chieh-shih; or Chiang Chung-cheng; or Jiang Jieshi)

5883. Archaeologists found that 90% of bodies at the 1320s Crow Creek Massacre showed evidence of this practice. Henry Hamilton acquired a derogatory nickname from Continental Army soldiers for encouraging this practice. French and British commanders in the early 18th century encouraged this practice by paying $60 bounties for its product as proof of events such as the Battle of Pequawket against the Abenaki. For the point, name this practice, common in conflicts between or against American Indians, of removing skin from the head of a dead enemy.
Answer: ScalpingSpring League

5884. For the last three decades of the 20th century, this country was governed by a "New Order" that collapsed following the Asian Financial Crisis and sweeping anti-Chinese riots. B.J. Habibie led the "Reform Era" of this nation, which attempted to liberalize the regime following the resignation of Suharto. This nation gained independence under Sukarno following the Japanese occupation of the East Indies. For the point, name this Asian nation whose Dutch capital, Batavia, was renamed Jakarta.
Answer: Republic of Indonesia (

5885. Jerzy Kulczycki [[KUL-shitz-kee]] opened one of the first cafes following the first of these events using coffee beans taken from the losing side. The 70-year old Nicholas, Count of Salm was lauded for commanding the winning side in one of these events, which was conducted by the forces of Suleiman the Magnificent. A charge by the winged hussars of John III Sobieski [[soh-bee-YETZ-kee]] ended the second of these events. For the point, name these two events in which Ottoman forces attempted to take the Austrian capital.
Answer: (Ottoman) Sieges of Vienna (

5886. After this man's 1964 arrest, he was slapped by the prime minister of his country, Hasan Ali Mansur, for refusing to cease his criticism of the government while working as a seminary teacher. In his first months in power, this man confronted political opposition by stating, "I shall kick their teeth in. I appoint the government." That followed fourteen years of exile for this man, including time in cities like Najaf and Paris. For the point, name this leader of the Islamic Revolution of 1979, the first Supreme Leader of Iran.
Answer: Ayatollah Khomeini (or Ruholla Khomeini

5887. In this nation, the anti-immigrant rhetoric of politician Pim Fortuyn [[for-TOYN]] led to his assassination during its 2002 general election. A ban on all public mosques and printings of the Koran were called for by this nation's far right faction, the Party for Freedom. On the holiday of Koningsdag [[KOH-nings-dahk]] in 2013, the reigning Queen Beatrix abdicated in favor of her son Willem-Alexander, the head of the House of Orange-Nassau. Mark Rutte [[ROO-teh]] leads, for the point, which Benelux nation governed from The Hague?
Answer: Netherlands (

5888. One of the oldest of these edifices in Maruoka [[[[mah-ROO-oh-KAH]] was subject to hitobashira, or human sacrifices by its foundation. Intentionally built a day's march apart, a network of these buildings existed between Busan and Seoul during the Chongyu War. The outbreak of the Ōnin War between competing daimyos accelerated the pace of construction of these military buildings. Shiro is the Japanese word for, for the point, what type of stone fortress also common in Medieval Europe?
Answer: Japanese castles (

5889. A scandal surrounding this industry began when Hugh Allan gave the Conservative party 360,000 dollars in exchange for a contract. It isn’t gold mining, but hundreds of Chinese- Canadians died in nitroglycerin accidents while working on a project in this industry. That project in this industry was completed in Craigellachie [[kruh-GEH-luh-kee]] by Donald Smith. Cornelius Van Horne was a tycoon in, for the point, what industry that built the Canadian Pacific from Ontario to British Columbia?
Answer: Railway Industry (

5890. On the DR 284 stone at the Hunnestad Monument, Ole Worm observed an image of one of these creatures holding two snakes and riding a wolf. That image is usually identified as Hyrrokin, a female example of these creatures who assisted in the funeral of Baldr. Another of these creatures, Utgard-Loki, challenged Thor to lift a cat and drink from a cup. The trickster god, Loki, was the son of one of these creatures, some of whom were believed to live in a realm of frost. For the point, name these creatures attested to in Norse poems.
Answer: (Frost) Giants (

5891. The first of these institutions in the U.S. was founded by a man who won a gold medal at the Exposition Universelle for producing a malleable nickel that improved coinage. Republican Party co-founder, Amos Tuck, names an institution of this type at Dartmouth. A Pennsylvania institution of this type was created in 1881 by the co-founder of Bethlehem Steel, Joseph Wharton. The GMAT is the entrance exam for these schools, one of which was where Warren Buffett received an MBA. For the point, name these institutions where one can learn the principles of management and entrepreneurship.
Answer: Business schools (

5892. A group of fisherman and illegal wood gatherers were massacred on this country’s Christie Island. This country’s namesake “Way to Socialism” was opposed by a number of university students in a protest named for its occurrence on August 8, 1988. The State Peace and Development Council was the military government of this country where the National League for Democracy was led by a daughter of a certain revolutionary. For the point, name this country whose leaders have included Aung San Suu Kyi [[ON SAWN SOO CHEE]].
Answer: Myanmar (or Republic of the Union of Myanmar

5893. This politician, who paid off George Floyd's daughter's college tuition, received an endorsement from a man who'd previously endorsed Andrew Yang. Elon Musk endorsed this politician, who alleged that the Democratic Party was intentionally giving the Black community the birth control "Plan B" to suppress their votes. This politician, who ran alongside Wyoming preacher Michelle Tidball, represented the "Birthday Party." For the point, name this 2020 Presidential candidate and rapper whose campaign advisors included his then wife, Kim Kardashian.
Answer: Kanye West (

5894. Work done directly for this series of missions led to the invention of "Development Before the Fact" programming and the Universal Systems Language. Electrical engineer Judith Love Cohen contributed to these missions while giving birth. Margaret Hamilton's MIT Instrumentation Laboratory created the key software for these missions, whose ill-fated 1970 entry's emergency return path was calculated by Katherine Johnson. For the point, name this series of missions whose eleventh instance landed the first astronauts on the Moon.
Answer: Apollo program (or Project Apollo)

5895. Use of this metric for placing students of color in EMR-type classes was largely barred in California by the case Larry P v. Riles. Stephen Jay Gould denounced attempts to singularly measure this metric in The Mismeasure of Man. Generations tend to perform better on tests evaluating this metric over time according to the Flynn effect. Robert Yerkes was hired to develop a method for the Army to take this metric in recruits. For the point, name this metric that can be measured on the Stanford-Binet scale, a "quotient" for which rates 90 to 109 as the average person's capability.
Answer: Intelligence (or Intelligence Quotient

5896. A Magonid royal with this epithet supposedly encountered a hairy tribe of savage men known as the Gorillai, who lend their name to the modern ape. That man with this nickname, Hanno, may have reached as far south as Gabon on a voyage that departed from Carthaginian territory in Iberia. Another man with this epithet funded the construction of a fleet of caravels, which led to the colonization of the Madeiras and the Azores. For the point, give this nickname held by a Prince of Portugal named Henry who encouraged 15th-century Portuguese exploration.
Answer: The Navigator (

5897. This philosophy’s Three Obediences and Four Virtues prompted criticism from later scholars. A divine moral will was denied in "The Discussion of Heaven" chapter from a namesake book by this philosophy's scholar Xunzi. Emperor Shi Huangdi rejected this school of thought and adopted Legalism during the Qin [[CHIN]] Dynasty. Mencius argued that this philosophy regards human nature as ‘intrinsically benevolent’ in his explanation of the Analects. For the point, identify this ancient Chinese school of thought named for a sage of the Spring and Autumn period.
Answer: Confucianism (or Kǒngjiào

5898. During this man's administration, blackmarketers named vory y zakone operated as semi-legal criminal syndicates in his nation. After many of his party members voted negatively of his leadership at the 17th Central Committee, this leader pointed an unloaded Mosin-Nagant rifle at the crowd. During the so-called "Period of Yezhov," this leader conducted show trials of men like Mikhail Bukharin and other purported "Trotskyites." For the point, name this dictator of the USSR who ordered the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany.
Answer: Joseph Stalin (or Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin

5899. A test of this effect accelerated canal rays through perforated plates with an immense charge. This effect was first observed in an 1842 report on the color of binary stars. In astronomy, this effect can cause "redshift" or "blueshift." Discovered in 1842 and named for an Austrian physicist, for the point, what is this effect of a wave's frequency changing with movement relative to an observer, often exemplified by ambulance sirens?
Answer: Doppler effect (

5900. During this event, the son of the eventual victor unsuccessfully attempted to beseige Ueda [[OO-eh-dah]] Castle. Prior to this event, Ishida Mitsunari claimed Osaka Castle and planned to force hostages to join his side. This decisive event ended the Sengoku, or "Warring States, period in one country, which followed after the death of Toyotomi Hideyoshi. For the point, name this decisive battle often seen as the unofficial beginning of the Tokugawa shogunate.
Answer: Battle of Sekigahara (or Sekigahara no Tatakai)

5901. In the 1930s, Austrian chemist Fritz Johann Hansgirg built a plant to produce this compound in Japanese-occupied Korea. Operation Gunnerside saw the destruction of that facility for this compound by Norwegian commandos in order to inhibit Nazi Germany's ability to develop nuclear weapons. For the point, name this compound of oxygen and two deuterium atoms, historically used as a moderator for nuclear uranium reactors.
Answer: Heavy Water (or Deuterium Oxide; or D2O or 2H2O

5902. This port was temporarily blockaded during a 1918 British operation under John Jellicoe which sank obsolete battleships in this city's harbor. William Caxton created the first English language book using the newly created printing press in this European city. The massacre of a French garrison during this Belgian city's namesake "Matins" [[mah-TEEN]] led to the Battle of the Golden Spurs in the Franco-Flemish war. The World War One Battle of Courtrai liberated, for the point, what North Sea port in West Flanders?
Answer: Bruges (

5903. This dynasty declined during rebellions led by Wang Xianzhi [[SHYAN-ZHEE]] and Huang Chao. The death penalty was ended during this dynasty’s golden age under Emperor Xuanzong. This dynasty ended the Gӧktürk Khaganate and encountered the Abbasids at the Talas River. Arab mercenaries were employed by this dynasty to defeat a rebellious Sogdian general, An Lushan. For the point, identify this Chinese dynasty that experienced an interregnum from the only legitimized Chinese Empress, Wu Zetian.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (or Tángcháo

5904. This figure supposedly kept a blank cover copy of the novel Dangerous Liaisons so her ladies-in-waiting wouldn't gossip in the court. This royal demanded the dismissal of the Duc d'Aiguillon [["die"-gee-YAWN]] after quarreling with chancellor Maupeou [[moe-POO]]. The Comtesse de la Motte's successful forgery of this woman's signature led to the Affair of the Diamond Necklace. This woman stated, "Pardon me, sir, I did not do it on purpose" after stepping on the executioner's foot shortly before being guillotined. For the point, name this wife of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]].
Answer: Marie Antoinette (

5905. Almost 7,000 people who died during this event were cremated on the Altmarkt square. This event was planned as an alteration of Operation Thunderclap against Berlin. Despite a U.S. Air Force report determining that strategic targets like a railway junction and poison gas plant were destroyed, this event convinced Winston Churchill to lobby against "morale bombings." For the point, name this winter 1945 attack on a German city in Saxony that resulted in a devastating firestorm.
Answer: Bombing of Dresden (

5906. Violet Bonham Carter wrote a biography of this man titled [this man] As I Knew Him. The Malakand campaign in India inspired this man to write his only fiction novel, Savrola. This man recounted his escape from a Boer POW camp in London to Ladysmith via Pretoria. Caesar's invasion of the British Isles begins this writer's A History of the English-Speaking People. For the point, name this winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, who wrote The Second World War from his perspective as Prime Minister of the U.K.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)Spring League

5907. This man's atrocities were described by George Washington Wallace with one of the first uses of the phrase, "crimes against humanity." Those crimes committed by this man and the Force Publique came to light in the Casement Report. During this man’s reign, he sent Henry Morton Stanley to explore Africa’s present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo. Serving the longest reign of any Belgian monarch, for the point, name this second King of the Belgians and notorious personal owner of the Congo Free State.
Answer: Leopold II

5908. Mirwais Hotak led a rebellion that won independence for this nation's southern portion from the Safavids. This country's Hotak dynasty ruled for decades before being supplanted by the later Durrani Empire. The loya jirga is a traditional, consultative assembly in this country where the head of state occupies the Arg Palace. The Soviet Union conducted largely unsuccessful operations in this country against the Mujahedeen. For the point, identify this country where the Taliban took power in a siege on Kabul.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (

5909. A commander in this war brought troops across the Pikysyry [[pee-KEE-see-REE]] River during a series of three victories at Ytororó [[ee-toh-ROH-roh]], Avay, and Lomas Valentinas that comprised the "Deed of December." During this war's climactic Battle of Cerro Corá, the dictator Francisco Solano López was killed. Up to 90% of the losing country's male population died in this war. For the point, name this late 1860s war in which Paraguay lost to Uruguay, Argentina, and Brazil.
Answer: War of the Triple Alliance (or Guerra de la Triple Alianza or Guerra da Tríplice Aliança

5910. This woman is sometimes considered the first female ambassador in European history for representing her sister, Joanna, in a certain court. This woman authored a possibly fictive letter asking her nephew, Emperor Charles V, to protect her daughter. That girl's father was a king this woman married after the death of his elder brother, her first husband, Arthur, Prince of Wales. This woman died in Kimbolton Castle some time after her husband divorced her for her lady-in-waiting, Anne Boleyn. For the point, name this queen consort of England and first wife of King Henry VIII.
Answer: Catherine of Aragon (or Catalina de Aragón

5911. This state's police force was known as the assara-munidios, or "Enforcers," who not only arrested criminals but also acted as jurists. An Islamic convert from Castile named Judar Pasha razed this empire's salt mines in Taghaza [[tah-gah-ZAH]] during an invasion. This empire's Askia Dynasty fled south after a Moroccan invasion led to Askia Ishaq II's [[ee-SHAK the Second's]] deposition following the Battle of Tondibi. The Mali empire was overthrown by, for the point, what West African state governed from Gao [[GOW]]?
Answer: Songhai EmpireSpring League

5912. A man with this name, likely deriving from the minor deity Pummay, built early settlements on Sardinia as described in the Nora Stone. That king with this name orchestrated the killing of his sister's husband and fellow royal Acerbas, prompting his wife Dido to flee Phoenicia to found the city of Carthage. An artist with this name prayed to Aphrodite to bring his statue of Galatea to life. A George Bernard Shaw play derives its name from, for the point, what Cypriot sculptor of Greek myth?
Answer: Pygmalion

5913. Donald Trump’s envoy Richard Grenell pressured this country’s LDK Party to leave its ruling coalition. A prime minister of this country named Hashim Thaçi [[THAH-chee]] worked to normalize relations with its northern neighbor in the Brussels Agreement. This country’s KLA was labeled a terrorist group by Slobodan Milošević [[mee-LOH-seh-vich]]. This country declared its independence in 2008, largely due to its majority-Albanian population. For the point, name this partially-recognized country claimed by Serbia and governed from Pristina.
Answer: Kosovo (or Kosova; or Kosovë

5914. The U.S. Seventh Army made use of this series of defenses during Operation Northwind, a counteroffensive which began following an advance by Johannes Blaskowitz into the Vosges [[VOHZH]] Mountains. In Toward a Professional Army, Charles de Gaulle advocated abandoning spending on this project in favor of mobile warfare research. The Nazi government built the Siegfried Line opposite this series of fortifications. For the point, name this "Line" of French fortifications in Alsace-Lorraine bypassed by a blitzkrieg invasion of Belgium.
Answer: Maginot [[mah-jeh-NOH]] Line (or Ligne Maginot)

5915. This emperor established the new 15th and 22nd legions or Primigeniae [[PREE-mee- GEN-ee-"eye"]] and ordered the construction of a new lighthouse at Boulougne [[boo-LOAN]] as part of a campaign he designed after receiving the fugitive Adminius. This emperor ordered the collection of musculi [[MOO-skoo-lee]], which may have been components of siege-engines but are often translated as "seashells," in a story about his failed campaign. For the point, name this Roman emperor whose thwarted 40 AD invasion of Britain inspired a successful conquest by his successor, Claudius.
Answer: Caligula (or Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus; do not

5916. This man survived two separate plane crashes in 1954 and was not found for 24 hours until rescuers discovered him with a bottle of gin in his hand. While an ambulance driver on the Italian front, this man nearly died from an Austro-Hungarian mortar shell. This journalist, who lived in the Finca Vigia in Cuba, reported on the last stand of Republican forces at the Ebro River, inspiring his work For Whom the Bell Tolls. For the point, name this Nobel laureate who drew from real-life experiences to write A Farewell to Arms and The Sun also Rises.
Answer: Ernest Hemingway (or Ernest Miller Hemingway)

5917. A moral panic surrounding delinquency contributed to this country’s Mazengarb Report. The South African rugby team was controversially allowed to pass through this country during the Springbok Tour. The institution of a floating exchange rate and tighter monetary policy were among the principles of one prime minister in this country that came to be called Rogernomics. Jenny Shipley was the first female prime minister of this country that is currently led by a woman. Jacinda Ardern governs, for the point, what country, the native home of the Maori people?
Answer: New Zealand (or Aotearoa; or NZ)

5918. Partially inspired by his presence at the Council of Trent, this man executed his Annunciation for the Church of San Salvador. This man's nephew and apprentice Marco Vecellio [[veh-cheh-LEE-oh]] painted this artist's former patron, the Habsburg Emperor Charles V, meeting with Pope Clement VII [[the seventh]]. In a A Tramp Abroad, Mark Twain said "the obscenest picture the world possesses" is this artist's Venus of Urbino. For the point, name this Renaissance artist of Sacred and Profane Love.
Answer: Titian (

5919. This practice is the only known way to get the prion disease Kuru, which is sometimes seen in the Fore people in New Guinea. The names of the Carib and Mohawk people are derived from neighboring groups' belief that those tribes engaged in this practice. Dictators Jean-Bedel Bokassa and Idi Amin were both accused of subjecting political enemies to this practice, which the Donner Party resorted to while trapped in the Sierra Nevadas. Ritually practiced by the Aztecs, for the point, what practice denotes the eating of human flesh?
Answer: Human Cannibalism

5920. The SIT absolved this politician of wrongdoing in inciting 2002 riots that led to the Gulbarg Society massacre. Following the Uri terrorist attacks, this Prime Minister called for the diplomatic isolation of Pakistan. Mass protests against this man's administration occurred after his passage of the Citizen Amendment Act, due in part to Muslims being excluded from a path to Indian citizenship. The leader of the BJP is, for the point, which Gujarati politician who has served as the Prime Minister of India since 2014?
Answer: Narendra Modi (or Narendra Damodardas Modi)Spring League

5921. In this nation, cameraman Alexander Lashkarava died from wounds received from an anti-LGBTQ mob in July 2021. Women soldiers in this country known as the "Black Pantyhose Battalion" took up arms to support Zviad Gamsakhurdia [[svee-AHD gam-SAH-kerr-DEE-ah]], who was overthrown in a 1992 coup and replaced with a military council supported by Moscow. The Medvedev regime invaded this nation in the late 2000s to prop up the republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. For the point, name this Caucasus nation which saw a regime change following the Rose Revolution in Tbilisi.
Answer: Georgia (

5922. An agreement named for this city attempted to pull the neutral Italy to the Allies by offering them the Slovenian portion of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Jay's Treaty, which aimed to end the practice of impressment and facilitate peaceful trade, is sometimes named for this city. Following the battle of Poitiers [[pwah-tee-AY]], Edward the Black Prince acquired much of Western France through a treaty with this name. A follow-up to the Washington Naval Conference was, for the point, which agreement named for the capital city of the UK?
Answer: London (

5923. The U.S. made a deal with this leader to buy up the entirety of his nation's tungsten output to deprive Nazi Germany of the mineral. This leader permitted the volunteer brigade known as the "Blue Division" to fight for the German military during on the Eastern Front of World War Two. At the Hendaye Meeting, this leader agreed to join the Axis on the ground that he receive the entirety of French Morocco and the British possession of Gibraltar. Spain was neutral during the Second World War due to, for the point, which leader of the Falange?
Answer: Francisco Franco (or Francisco Franco Bahamonde)

5924. A test of this effect accelerated canal rays through perforated plates with an immense charge. The question of whether this effect in light is partially caused by relativistic time dilation was addressed in the Ives-Stillwell experiment in 1938. This effect was first observed in an 1842 report on the color of binary stars. In astronomy, this effect can cause "redshift" or "blueshift." Discovered in 1842 and named for an Austrian physicist, for the point, what is this effect of a wave's frequency changing with movement relative to an observer, often exemplified by ambulance sirens?
Answer: Doppler effect (

5925. During this event, the son of the eventual victor unsuccessfully attempted to beseige Ueda [[OO-eh-dah]] Castle. Prior to this event, Ishida Mitsunari claimed Osaka Castle and planned to force hostages to join his side. This decisive event ended the Sengoku, or "Warring States, period in one country, which followed after the death of Toyotomi Hideyoshi. For the point, name this decisive battle often seen as the unofficial beginning of the Tokugawa shogunate.
Answer: Battle of Sekigahara (or Sekigahara no Tatakai)

5926. In the 1930s, Austrian chemist Fritz Johann Hansgirg built a plant to produce this compound in Japanese-occupied Korea. Norsk Hydro built the first commercial plant for production of this compound, and its destruction was the subject of the failed British Operation Freshman. Operation Gunnerside saw the destruction of that facility for this compound by Norwegian commandos in order to inhibit Nazi Germany's ability to develop nuclear weapons. For the point, name this compound of oxygen and two deuterium atoms, historically used as a moderator for nuclear uranium reactors.
Answer: Heavy Water (or Deuterium Oxide; or D2O or 2H2O

5927. This port was temporarily blockaded during a 1918 British operation under John Jellicoe which sank obsolete battleships in this city's harbor. William Caxton created the first English language book using the newly created printing press in this European city. The massacre of a French garrison during this Belgian city's namesake "Matins" [[mah-TEEN]] led to the Battle of the Golden Spurs in the Franco-Flemish war. The World War One Battle of Courtrai liberated, for the point, what North Sea port in West Flanders?
Answer: Bruges (

5928. The first major success in this campaign was the deposition of Khan Kuchum by Yermak Timofeyevich's forces. Dmitry Pavlutsky's attempt at a genocide of the Chukchi during this campaign was thwarted by an overwhelming loss near Markovo. The Ostyuks, Voguls, and Buriat were among the peoples who were colonized during this process. For the point, identify this approximately century-long process beginning in 1580 by which the vast eastern portion of present-day Russia was brought under the tsars' control.
Answer: Russian conquest of Siberia (or colonization of Siberia

5929. This dynasty declined during rebellions led by Wang Xianzhi [[SHYAN-ZHEE]] and Huang Chao. The death penalty was ended during this dynasty’s golden age under Emperor Xuanzong. This dynasty ended the Gӧktürk Khaganate and encountered the Abbasids at the Talas River. Arab mercenaries were employed by this dynasty to defeat a rebellious Sogdian general, An Lushan. For the point, identify this Chinese dynasty that experienced an interregnum from the only legitimized Chinese Empress, Wu Zetian.
Answer: Tang Dynasty (or Tángcháo

5930. This figure supposedly kept a blank cover copy of the novel Dangerous Liaisons so her ladies-in-waiting wouldn't gossip in the court. This royal demanded the dismissal of the Duc d'Aiguillon [["die"-gee-YAWN]] after quarreling with chancellor Maupeou [[moe-POO]]. The Comtesse de la Motte's successful forgery of this woman's signature led to the Affair of the Diamond Necklace. This woman stated, "Pardon me, sir, I did not do it on purpose" after stepping on the executioner's foot shortly before being guillotined. For the point, name this wife of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]].
Answer: Marie Antoinette (

5931. Almost 7,000 people who died during this event were cremated on the Altmarkt square. This event was planned as an alteration of Operation Thunderclap against Berlin. Despite a U.S. Air Force report determining that strategic targets like a railway junction and poison gas plant were destroyed, this event convinced Winston Churchill to lobby against "morale bombings." For the point, name this winter 1945 attack on a German city in Saxony that resulted in a devastating firestorm.
Answer: Bombing of Dresden (

5932. Violet Bonham Carter wrote a biography of this man titled [this man] As I Knew Him. The Malakand campaign in India inspired this man to write his only fiction novel, Savrola. This man recounted his escape from a Boer POW camp in London to Ladysmith via Pretoria. Caesar's invasion of the British Isles begins this writer's A History of the English-Speaking People. For the point, name this winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, who wrote The Second World War from his perspective as Prime Minister of the U.K.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)

5933. This man's atrocities were described by George Washington Wallace with one of the first uses of the phrase, "crimes against humanity." Those crimes committed by this man and the Force Publique came to light in the Casement Report. During this man’s reign, he sent Henry Morton Stanley to explore Africa’s present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo. Serving the longest reign of any Belgian monarch, for the point, name this second King of the Belgians and notorious personal owner of the Congo Free State.
Answer: Leopold II

5934. Mirwais Hotak led a rebellion that won independence for this nation's southern portion from the Safavids. This country's Hotak dynasty ruled for decades before being supplanted by the later Durrani Empire. The loya jirga is a traditional, consultative assembly in this country where the head of state occupies the Arg Palace. The Soviet Union conducted largely unsuccessful operations in this country against the Mujahedeen. For the point, identify this country where the Taliban took power in a siege on Kabul.
Answer: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (

5935. A commander in this war brought troops across the Pikysyry [[pee-KEE-see-REE]] River during a series of three victories at Ytororó [[ee-toh-ROH-roh]], Avay, and Lomas Valentinas that comprised the "Deed of December." This was the last war in which the Duke of Caxias [[kah-SHEE-us]] commanded troops in battle. During this war's climactic Battle of Cerro Corá, the dictator Francisco Solano López was killed. Up to 90% of the losing country's male population died in this war. For the point, name this late 1860s war in which Paraguay lost to Uruguay, Argentina, and Brazil.
Answer: War of the Triple Alliance (or Guerra de la Triple Alianza or Guerra da Tríplice Aliança

5936. This woman is sometimes considered the first female ambassador in European history for representing her sister, Joanna, in a certain court. This woman authored a possibly fictive letter asking her nephew, Emperor Charles V, to protect her daughter. That girl's father was a king this woman married after the death of his elder brother, her first husband, Arthur, Prince of Wales. This woman died in Kimbolton Castle some time after her husband divorced her for her lady-in-waiting, Anne Boleyn. For the point, name this queen consort of England and first wife of King Henry VIII.
Answer: Catherine of Aragon (or Catalina de Aragón

5937. This state's police force was known as the assara-munidios, or "Enforcers," who not only arrested criminals but also acted as jurists. An Islamic convert from Castile named Judar Pasha razed this empire's salt mines in Taghaza [[tah-gah-ZAH]] during an invasion. This empire's Askia Dynasty fled south after a Moroccan invasion led to Askia Ishaq II's [[ee-SHAK the Second's]] deposition following the Battle of Tondibi. The Mali empire was overthrown by, for the point, what West African state governed from Gao [[GOW]]?
Answer: Songhai Empire

5938. A man with this name, likely deriving from the minor deity Pummay, built early settlements on Sardinia as described in the Nora Stone. That king with this name orchestrated the killing of his sister's husband and fellow royal Acerbas, prompting his wife Dido to flee Phoenicia to found the city of Carthage. An artist with this name prayed to Aphrodite to bring his statue of Galatea to life. A George Bernard Shaw play derives its name from, for the point, what Cypriot sculptor of Greek myth?
Answer: Pygmalion

5939. Donald Trump’s envoy Richard Grenell pressured this country’s LDK Party to leave its ruling coalition. A prime minister of this country named Hashim Thaçi [[THAH-chee]] worked to normalize relations with its northern neighbor in the Brussels Agreement. This country’s KLA was labeled a terrorist group by Slobodan Milošević [[mee-LOH-seh-vich]]. This country declared its independence in 2008, largely due to its majority-Albanian population. For the point, name this partially-recognized country claimed by Serbia and governed from Pristina.
Answer: Kosovo (or Kosova; or Kosovë

5940. During an early phase of popularity for this instrument, it was used to play the Valse Erica by Rudy Wiedoeft. The lead player on Somethin' Else used this instrument and recorded the crossover hit "Mercy Mercy Mercy." This instrument played by Cannonball Adderley was used by the composer of "Ko-Ko" to pioneer bebop and is the lead instrument on the "Yardbird Suite." For the point, name this kind of instrument whose "alto" variety was played by Charlie Parker.
Answer: Saxophone (

5941. This emperor established the new 15th and 22nd legions or Primigeniae [[PREE-mee- GEN-ee-"eye"]] and ordered the construction of a new lighthouse at Boulougne [[boo-LOAN]] as part of a campaign he designed after receiving the fugitive Adminius. This emperor ordered the collection of musculi [[MOO-skoo-lee]], which may have been components of siege-engines but are often translated as "seashells," in a story about his failed campaign. For the point, name this Roman emperor whose thwarted 40 AD invasion of Britain inspired a successful conquest by his successor, Claudius.
Answer: Caligula (or Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus; do not

5942. This man survived two separate plane crashes in 1954 and was not found for 24 hours until rescuers discovered him with a bottle of gin in his hand. While an ambulance driver on the Italian front, this man nearly died from an Austro-Hungarian mortar shell. This journalist, who lived in the Finca Vigia in Cuba, reported on the last stand of Republican forces at the Ebro River, inspiring his work For Whom the Bell Tolls. For the point, name this Nobel laureate who drew from real-life experiences to write A Farewell to Arms and The Sun also Rises.
Answer: Ernest Hemingway (or Ernest Miller Hemingway)

5943. A moral panic surrounding delinquency contributed to this country’s Mazengarb Report. The South African rugby team was controversially allowed to pass through this country during the Springbok Tour. The institution of a floating exchange rate and tighter monetary policy were among the principles of one prime minister in this country that came to be called Rogernomics. Jenny Shipley was the first female prime minister of this country that is currently led by a woman. Jacinda Ardern governs, for the point, what country, the native home of the Maori people?
Answer: New Zealand (or Aotearoa; or NZ)Spring League

5944. Partially inspired by his presence at the Council of Trent, this man executed his Annunciation for the Church of San Salvador. This man's nephew and apprentice Marco Vecellio [[veh-cheh-LEE-oh]] painted this artist's former patron, the Habsburg Emperor Charles V, meeting with Pope Clement VII [[the seventh]]. In a A Tramp Abroad, Mark Twain said "the obscenest picture the world possesses" is this artist's Venus of Urbino. For the point, name this Renaissance artist of Sacred and Profane Love.
Answer: Titian (

5945. Students protesting this man's regime hid in the Church of Divine Mercy after members of their contingent set parts of the Rubén Darío University Campus ablaze. With future right-wing president Violeta Chamorro, this man once headed the Junta of National Construction after the fall of the Somoza regime. Fidel Castro personally trained this politician in guerilla warfare tactics following his exile from Managua in 1974. A controversial fourth term was won in 2022 by, for the point, what leader of the Sandinista National Liberation Front and president of Nicaragua?
Answer: Daniel Ortega

5946. The SIT absolved this politician of wrongdoing in inciting 2002 riots that led to the Gulbarg Society massacre. Following the Uri terrorist attacks, this Prime Minister called for the diplomatic isolation of Pakistan. Mass protests against this man's administration occurred after his passage of the Citizen Amendment Act, due in part to Muslims being excluded from a path to Indian citizenship. The leader of the BJP is, for the point, which Gujarati politician who has served as the Prime Minister of India since 2014?
Answer: Narendra Modi (or Narendra Damodardas Modi)

5947. In this nation, cameraman Alexander Lashkarava died from wounds received from an anti-LGBTQ mob in July 2021. Women soldiers in this country known as the "Black Pantyhose Battalion" took up arms to support Zviad Gamsakhurdia [[svee-AHD gam-SAH-kerr-DEE-ah]], who was overthrown in a 1992 coup and replaced with a military council supported by Moscow. The Medvedev regime invaded this nation in the late 2000s to prop up the republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. For the point, name this Caucasus nation which saw a regime change following the Rose Revolution in Tbilisi.
Answer: Georgia (

5948. This is the central action performed during an annual tradition co-created by Travis Garone that began in South Australia. Every March, members of the United States Air Force engage in this action to honor triple-ace Robin Olds. A man named Emmet Pearson vowed to never stop doing this until the Vikings won a Super Bowl. A tradition that involves doing this to raise awareness for prostate cancer is called Movember. For the point, name this practice in which one goes for a period of time without performing a certain act of personal grooming.
Answer: Growing facial hair (

5949. In 1935, a commission chartered by the Roosevelt administration found that one of this soldier's notable achievements took place at Sunflower Landing. During Pizarro's conquest of Peru, this man taught chess to the captive Atahualpa [[ah-tah-WAL-pah]]. This man fought a battle with Chief Tuskaloosa in what is now Alabama the year after his landing in Tampa Bay. For the point, name this Spanish explorer whose 1539 expedition across the present-day southeastern U.S. made him the first European to reach the Mississippi River.
Answer: Hernando de Soto

5950. An agreement named for this city attempted to pull the neutral Italy to the Allies by offering them the Slovenian portion of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Jay's Treaty, which aimed to end the practice of impressment and facilitate peaceful trade, is sometimes named for this city. Following the battle of Poitiers [[pwah-tee-AY]], Edward the Black Prince acquired much of Western France through a treaty with this name. A follow-up to the Washington Naval Conference was, for the point, which agreement named for the capital city of the UK?
Answer: London (

5951. This practice is the only known way to get the prion disease Kuru, which is sometimes seen in the Fore people in New Guinea. The names of the Carib and Mohawk people are derived from neighboring groups' belief that those tribes engaged in this practice. Dictators Jean-Bedel Bokassa and Idi Amin were both accused of subjecting political enemies to this practice, which the Donner Party resorted to while trapped in the Sierra Nevadas. Ritually practiced by the Aztecs, for the point, what practice denotes the eating of human flesh?
Answer: Human CannibalismSpring League

5952. The U.S. Seventh Army made use of this series of defenses during Operation Northwind, a counteroffensive which began following an advance by Johannes Blaskowitz into the Vosges [[VOHZH]] Mountains. In Toward a Professional Army, Charles de Gaulle advocated abandoning spending on this project in favor of mobile warfare research. The Nazi government built the Siegfried Line opposite this series of fortifications. For the point, name this "Line" of French fortifications in Alsace-Lorraine bypassed by a blitzkrieg invasion of Belgium.
Answer: Maginot [[mah-jeh-NOH]] Line (or Ligne Maginot)

5953. A popular inspirational tale arising from this war follows Andrew Rowan's attempt to deliver a message to a pro-U.S. general. Carter Johnson led buffalo soldiers at this war's Battle of Tayacoba. U.S. foreign policy towards a country that became independent as a result of this war was governed by the Teller and Platt Amendments and included a perpetual lease on Guantanamo Bay. For the point, name this war in which the U.S. gained control of Puerto Rico and the Philippines, as well as securing Cuban independence.
Answer: Spanish-American War (

5954. The U.S. made a deal with this leader to buy up the entirety of his nation's tungsten output to deprive Nazi Germany of the mineral. This leader permitted the volunteer brigade known as the "Blue Division" to fight for the German military during on the Eastern Front of World War Two. At the Hendaye Meeting, this leader agreed to join the Axis on the ground that he receive the entirety of French Morocco and the British possession of Gibraltar. Spain was neutral during the Second World War due to, for the point, which leader of the Falange?
Answer: Francisco Franco (or Francisco Franco Bahamonde)

5955. A 2010 redesign of this item removed the initials “VDB” from its front for the second time. During World War Two, these items were subject to a discoloring redox reaction when the chemistry-unaware Henry Morgenthau [[mohr-GEHN-thow]] authorized the addition of zinc to them. As a result, one of the most valuable examples of these items is the 1944 “steel wheat” variety. Since 2010 these items display a shield reading “e pluribus unum.” For ten points, name these coins which show Abraham Lincoln on the front.
Answer: U.S. penny (or pennies

5956. During this campaign, a combined 25 American and British planes crashed, with 101 fatalities overall. Gail Halvorsen dropped candy to awaiting children during this prolonged campaign, becoming known as the "Chocolate Flier." After the Deutsche [[DOY-chuh]] Mark was introduced, Soviet troops cut off road and rail access to supply an occupied city, immediately causing this event. For ten points, name this aerial campaign led by the United States to provide aid and supplies to the German capital.
Answer: Berlin Airlift (

5957. According to Marco Polo, a ruler of this city was locked in his treasure room without food or water for neglecting to spend his gold on the city’s defense. That ruler of this city, Al- Musta’sim [[al-moo-stah-SEEM]], legendarily died after being rolled in a carpet and trampled to death by an invader’s horses. Harun al-Rashid built a library in this city, which was destroyed in a 1258 siege by Hulagu [[hoo-LAH-goo]] Khan. For ten points, name this city which contained a “House of Wisdom” before becoming the capital of modern-day Iraq.
Answer: Baghdad

5958. Due to his money struggles, this philosopher was offered fifty years pay in advance by Catherine the Great to serve as her personal librarian. Pope Clement XIII [[the Thirteenth]] banned a compendium written by this man, citing its skepticism of Jesus' miracles. Alongside Jean d'Alembert [[dahl-ehm-BARE]], this man compiled a "systematic dictionary of the sciences, arts, and crafts." The chief editor of the Encyclopédie [[ohn-see-cloh-PEH-dee]] was, for ten points, which French philosopher?
Answer: Denis Diderot [[deh-NEE dih-deh-ROH]]Spring League

5959. An early lyric by this group parodies the nativist views of Enoch Powell and demands that immigrants return to their “commonwealth homes.” This group's members took an ill- fated trip to Rishikesh [[ree-shee-KESH]] for a guided meditation course with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. A member of this group left that course early to film the documentary Raga about his sitar teacher, Ravi Shankar. For ten points, name this influential band of the British Invasion whose songs “Get Back” and “Norwegian Wood” were credited to John Lennon and Paul McCartney.
Answer: The Beatles

5960. For use on this ship, Louis Casella manufactured a resilient version of a Six's thermometer. Charles W. Thomson supervised the team of naturalists aboard this vessel, whose equipment included over 181 miles of hemp rope. This vessel, commanded by George Nares and Frank Thomson, became the first to measure the depth of an area at the south end of the Mariana Trench. A four-year 1870s oceanographic expedition was undertaken by, for ten points, what Royal Navy vessel, after which the deepest point in the Marianas Trench was named?
Answer: HMS Challenger (

5961. English physician Thomas Sydenham wrote a 17th century manual advocating for a product containing this good, laudanum. Soldiers from the Kuomintang organized what became the "Golden Triangle" for production of this good while operating in Laos, Thailand and Myanmar. European traders sold this good to circumvent the Canton system, which exclusively required silver be spent to acquire goods like tea and porcelain. The Qing [[CHING]] and British empires fought two wars named for, for ten points, what illicit drug later used to produce heroin?
Answer: Opium poppy (

5962. This city's "Large Theater" Stabian Baths were built from the riches brought back from the Grecian campaigns of Lucius Mummius. In this city, a bordello known as the Lupanar, or "Wolf's Den," contained a fresco of the fertility deity Priapus [[pree-AH-puhs]. While leading rescue efforts in the harbor of the nearby city of Stabiae, Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder died when falling molten rock collided with his galley. For ten points, identify this city of Southern Italy that was destroyed along with Herculaneum in the eruption of Mount Vesuvius.
Answer: Pompeii (

5963. The deflection of this element’s particles led to J. J. Thomson’s discovery of atomic isotopes. It’s not krypton, but British chemist Sir William Ramsay and Morris W. Travers isolated this element in 1898 and named it for the Greek word for “New.” As a byproduct of air liquefaction, this element was shown by Georges Claude to be able to produce light in sealed tubes. For ten points, name this element historically used for signs in Las Vegas.
Answer: Neon (

5964. In Anatole France's Penguin Island, an allegory for this historical figure named Draco the Great founds the first royal dynasty of Penguinia. Ludovico Ariosto's Orlando Furioso begins with a dispute between this historical king and the Saracen king of Africa, Agramante. The Oliphant is blown by a namesake paladin of this historical king in the chanson The Song of Roland. The scholar Einhard wrote The Life of, for ten points, what Carolingian emperor of the 8th and 9th century?
Answer: Charlemagne (

5965. Working with General David Canaberro, this general established the Juliana Republic in southern Brazil. This man was infuriated by an agreement made at Plombières [[plohm- BEE-air]], which promised to cede his home city of Nice to France. This leader of the "Hunters of the Alps" aligned with the Colorados during the Uruguayan Civil War, after which he returned to his home country to lead the Expedition of the Thousand to Sicily. For ten points, name this Italian general, considered a father of the First Italian Republic.
Answer: Giuseppe Garibaldi (or Giuseppe Maria Garibaldi) BONUS: Which Italian

5966. This country named Frederick Charles of Hesse as its king in the aftermath of its 1918 Civil War. The Terijoki government claimed to represent this country's defeated Socialists, and the Lapua movement was a political party that was banned in this country following an attempted insurrection in Mäntsälä. Despite Carl Mannerheim's resistance, this country lost control of much of Karelia following the Winter War. For ten points, name this country that fought a German-supported faction in the Battle of Helsinki.
Answer: Republic of Finland (

5967. For years, scholars suspected that several frescoes in the Hall of the Five Hundred at the Palazzo Vecchio were painted over this man's historical work, The Battle of Anghiari. Under the patronage of Ludovico Sforza, this man developed a design for a "turtle-shell" fighting vehicle as well as a self-propelled cart and an automaton, though most of his work went unpublished due to being written in a secretive mirror script. For ten points, name this painter and inventor who is considered the consummate "Renaissance Man."
Answer: Leonardo da Vinci (

5968. This acquisition was retroactively confirmed by the decision American Insurance Co. v. Canter. Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin informed the sitting president that this acquisition was protected by the treaty-making provision in the Constitution. The costliness of the Haitian revolution led to this sale of territory by Napoleon to the United States. The Jefferson administration facilitated, for ten points, what "Purchase" which doubled the size of the United States?
Answer: Louisiana Purchase BONUS: The territory of the Louisiana Purchase was explored by which duo of officers who led the Corps of Discovery? Lewis and Clark (or Merriweather Lewis and William Clark

5969. An invention produced by Andreas Flocken is often considered the first "true" one of these objects, which were also produced by Walter Bersey in London. The development of MOSFET helped spark the modern commercial interest in these objects, whose first mass- produced example was the Roadster. Initially eclipsed by the emergence of internal- combustion engine vehicles, for ten points, what are these vehicles run entirely without gasoline, including the popular Tesla Model 3?
Answer: Electric Car (

5970. Successful commanders from this kingdom were often equated to the god Montu, a war deity who takes the shape of a bull. This polity employed the Medjay, a distinct Cushitic speaking people who served as a paramilitary police force. This kingdom created the sickle shaped sword meant for close-combat known as the Khopesh, and its military mass-adopted the chariot after being invaded by the Hyksos [[HIK-sohs]]. For ten points, name this ancient African kingdom which fought at the Battles of Megiddo and the Nile Delta.
Answer: Kingdom of Egypt (

5971. A tyrant of this city named Dionysius the Elder arrested the philosopher Plato and sold him into slavery following a disagreement. A former general of Pyrrhus of Epirus, Hiero II, served as a tyrant of this city, becoming a client of Rome during the First Punic War. Archimedes allegedly used a parabolic reflector to defend this city from a Roman attack, inventing the first "heat ray." For ten points, name this ancient Greek colony in the southeast of Sicily.
Answer: Syracuse (

5972. A subset of the "Great Railroad Strike of 1877" in this city included strikers trapping police officers on the Halsted Street bridge in the Battle of the Viaduct. During the "Red Summer," this city suffered a race riot on its South Side after African-American teen Eugene Williams was killed for swimming near an "All-White" beach. This city's Hyde Park neighborhood hosted the Columbian Exposition of 1893. Hull House was founded in, for ten points, which Midwestern city that suffered a "Great Fire" in the 1870s?
Answer: Chicago BONUS: Contributing to the violence of the Chicago Race Riot, the Hamburg Athletic Club, which included future mayor Richard J. Daley, was composed primarily of what white immigrant ethnic group that fiercely guarded neighborhoods like Bridgeport and Back of the Yards. Irish-Americans Third Quarter The categories are:

5973. Capital city of Colombia, which was secured following the Battle of Boyacá.
Answer: Bogota

5974. Central American state which broke away from Colombia in 1903 with U.S. backing.
Answer: Republic of Panama (or República de Panamá)

5975. "Liberator" of South America who became the first president of Gran Colombia.
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

5976. 1980s head of the Medellin [[meh-deh-YEEN]] cartel known as the "King of Cocaine."
Answer: Pablo Escobar

5977. Former Marxist-Leninist insurgent group in Colombia which utilized kidnapping and ransom.
Answer: FARC (

5978. Spanish viceroyalty which included modern-day Colombia, Venezuela, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Answer: Viceroyalty of New Granada (

5979. Colombian president from 2002 to 2010 who allied with the Bush administration to fight the War on Drugs in "Plan Colombia."
Answer: Álvaro Uribe Vélez

5980. Indigenous people of the Colombian altiplano that formed a namesake Confederation before being conquered by the Spanish.
Answer: Muisca (

5981. Polish capital which names a "Pact" of Communist nations led by the Soviet Union.
Answer: Warsaw (

5982. British prime minister who coined the term "Iron Curtain" in a 1946 speech.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)

5983. 1949 Collective Security organization including most Western European nations and the United States.
Answer: North Atlantic Treaty Organization (

5984. Conference in Crimea where the Allies agreed on how to split Europe.
Answer: Yalta Conference (

5985. "Movement" advocated by the likes of Kwame Nkrumah and Josip Tito as an alternative to the Eastern and Western blocs.
Answer: Non-Aligned Movement (

5986. Nation whose dictator Enver Hoxha [[HOH-shah]] re-aligned his state from the USSR to Communist China in the 1960s.
Answer: People's Socialist Republic of Albania (or Republika Popullore Socialiste e Shqipërisë)

5987. East German prime minister whose forced resignation in 1989 paved the way for a unified Germany.
Answer: Erich Honecker (or Erich Ernst Paul Honecker)

5988. "Doctrine" named for an American singer which Mikhail Gorbachev adopted, allowing neighbors to deal with their own internal affairs.
Answer: Sinatra DoctrineSpring League

5989. Country where Daniel Malan formalized apartheid in 1948?
Answer: Republic of South Africa (or RSA)

5990. Longtime prisoner who negotiated an end to apartheid with F.W. de Klerk before becoming president?
Answer: Nelson Mandela (or Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela)

5991. 1960 incident in which police killed 69 anti-passbook protestors?
Answer: Sharpeville Massacre

5992. Popular English sport played on the controversial "Springbok tour" in 1981?
Answer: Rugby (union)

5993. Common name for the Black "homelands" granted sham independence starting in 1972?
Answer: Bantustans

5994. Resort that named a 1985 pro-boycott song composed by Steven Van Zandt?
Answer: Sun City

5995. Leader of the Black Consciousness Movement who died in police custody in 1977?
Answer: Steve Biko (or Bantu Stephen Biko)Spring League

5996. The Statute of Laborers attempted to control wages following this event in England. Clement VI [[THE SIXTH]] tried to protect himself during this event by surrounding himself with torches, (+) and flagellants became common during this event. This event started in Europe when a Mongol army catapulted dead (*) bodies into the city of Kaffa. This event was caused by fleas from rats disseminating the bacteria Yersinia [[YER-sin-ee-ah]] pestis. For ten points, name this event in which a namesake disease ravaged Europe during the 14th century.
Answer: The Black Death (or the Bubonic Plague)

5997. A tableau by this artist depicts the historical Battle of Taillebourg [[TIE-bur]] during the Saintonge [[sahn-TAHNG]] War. While an attaché to a diplomatic envoy to the Kingdom of (+) Morocco, this artist painted the Orientalist work Women of Algiers. The toppling of Charles X [[the Tenth]] is represented by this artist in a painting depicting a bare-breasted women carrying the tricolour [[tree-koh-LOHR]] flag of France. Liberty (*) Leading the People was painted by, for ten points, which French Romantic artist?
Answer: Eugène Delacroix (or Ferdinand Victor Eugène Delacroix)

5998. The Sook Ching massacre occurred in this country, which was the southernmost of the Straits Settlements. Wired magazine writer William Gibson described this country as "Disneyland with the Death Penalty" in reference to harsh punishments such as (+) caning that are practiced by this country. Lee Kuan Yew was the first prime minister of this country that gained independence from (*) Malaysia following its foundation as a British trading post by Stamford Raffles. For ten points, name this wealthy Southeast Asian country with a majority Chinese population.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

5999. This non-Chinese figure trained at the Whampoa Military Academy and offered David Ben-Gurion and the Jewish people a homeland in his nation. This politician used the pseudonym "Nguyen [[WHEN]] the (+) Patriot" while writing articles prior to the Versailles Peace Talks. This man led the 1945 August General Uprising which successfully deposed the colonial French following the nine-year First (*) Indochina War. The city of Saigon was renamed in honor of, for ten points, which first president of communist Vietnam?
Answer: Ho Chi Minh (or Nguyễn Sinh Cung)Spring League

6000. English words such as "Person" and "Military" may have derived from this civilization that spoke an isolated Tyrsenian language. This civilization is usually identified with the Villanovan culture, and its people became the ancestors of modern (+) Tuscany. This European civilization, from whom King Tarquin the Proud was a descendant, was assimilated by (*) Roman encroachment from its south. For ten points, identify this ancient Italian civilization that was once centered on the region of Etruria.
Answer: Etruscans (

6001. Soe Naing was the first of over a hundred journalists from this nation to be imprisoned in 2021, with many being placed in the Insein Prison first run by the State Law and Order (+) Restoration Council. 2020 election results in this nation were annulled following a coup by the Tatmadaw [[taht-MAH-"tau"]] armed forces. That coup removed Aung (*) San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] from power in, for ten points, which southeast Asian nation, once known as Burma?
Answer: Myanmar (

6002. This man compared the extinction of civilization to that of a species in his 1910 Romanes lecture Biological Analogies in History. A late 1880s winter killed much of this man's cattle, forcing him to abandon his ranching venture at Elkhorn. With his son, (+) Kermit, this man headed a namesake expedition with the Smithsonian, collecting over 11,000 animal specimens and authoring African Game Trails. (*) For ten points, name this U.S. president, whose saving of a cub led to the creation of his namesake stuffed bear.
Answer: Theodore Roosevelt Jr. (or Teddy [a]Roosevelt

6003. Medieval historian Roger of Wendover claimed that this man offered to convert to Islam if Muhammad al-Nasir lent him military support. This man's refusal to appoint sub-prior Reginald to the post of Archbishop of (+) Canterbury led to his temporary excommunication by Innocent III. This king was temporarily deposed by the French King, Louis the Lion, after he captured half of England during the First (*) Barons' War. For ten points, name this brother of Richard the Lionheart and signer of the Magna Carta.
Answer: King John (

6004. Muslim scholar Barani writes that "not a dog and cat" was left in this city after Muhammad bin Tughluq moved the seat of his government to the Deogiri citadel. A (+) sultan of this city named Ibrahim Lodi died on the battlefield at Panipat attempting to stop Babur the Tiger's invasion. The Kashmiri, Turkman and Lahori gates of this city all lead to this city's focal point, the (*) Red Fort, which was built by Shah Jahan. For ten points, name this Indian city that was capital of a namesake sultanate and the Mughal Empire.
Answer: Delhi (

6005. In Anatole France's Penguin Island, an allegory for this historical figure named Draco the Great founds the first royal dynasty of Penguinia. Ludovico Ariosto's Orlando Furioso begins with a dispute between this historical king and the Saracen king of Africa, Agramante. The Oliphant is blown by a namesake paladin of this historical king in the chanson The Song of Roland. The scholar Einhard wrote The Life of, for ten points, what Carolingian emperor of the 8th and 9th century?
Answer: Charlemagne (

6006. During this campaign, a combined 25 American and British planes crashed, with 101 fatalities overall. Gail Halvorsen dropped candy to awaiting children during this prolonged campaign, becoming known as the "Chocolate Flier." After the Deutsche [[DOY-chuh]] Mark was introduced, Soviet troops cut off road and rail access to supply an occupied city, immediately causing this event. For ten points, name this aerial campaign led by the United States to provide aid and supplies to the German capital.
Answer: Berlin Airlift (

6007. According to Marco Polo, a ruler of this city was locked in his treasure room without food or water for neglecting to spend his gold on the city’s defense. That ruler of this city, Al- Musta’sim [[al-moo-stah-SEEM]], legendarily died after being rolled in a carpet and trampled to death by an invader’s horses. Harun al-Rashid built a library in this city, which was destroyed in a 1258 siege by Hulagu [[hoo-LAH-goo]] Khan. For ten points, name this city which contained a “House of Wisdom” before becoming the capital of modern-day Iraq.
Answer: Baghdad

6008. The deflection of this element’s particles led to J. J. Thomson’s discovery of atomic isotopes. It’s not krypton, but British chemist Sir William Ramsay and Morris W. Travers isolated this element in 1898 and named it for the Greek word for “New.” As a byproduct of air liquefaction, this element was shown by Georges Claude to be able to produce light in sealed tubes. For ten points, name this element historically used for signs in Las Vegas.
Answer: Neon (

6009. An early lyric by this group parodies the nativist views of Enoch Powell and demands that immigrants return to their “commonwealth homes.” This group's members took an ill- fated trip to Rishikesh [[ree-shee-KESH]] for a guided meditation course with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. A member of this group left that course early to film the documentary Raga about his sitar teacher, Ravi Shankar. For ten points, name this influential band of the British Invasion whose songs “Get Back” and “Norwegian Wood” were credited to John Lennon and Paul McCartney.
Answer: The Beatles

6010. For use on this ship, Louis Casella manufactured a resilient version of a Six's thermometer. Charles W. Thomson supervised the team of naturalists aboard this vessel, whose equipment included over 181 miles of hemp rope. This vessel, commanded by George Nares and Frank Thomson, became the first to measure the depth of an area at the south end of the Mariana Trench. A four-year 1870s oceanographic expedition was undertaken by, for ten points, what Royal Navy vessel, after which the deepest point in the Marianas Trench was named?
Answer: HMS Challenger (

6011. English physician Thomas Sydenham wrote a 17th century manual advocating for a product containing this good, laudanum. Soldiers from the Kuomintang organized what became the "Golden Triangle" for production of this good while operating in Laos, Thailand and Myanmar. European traders sold this good to circumvent the Canton system, which exclusively required silver be spent to acquire goods like tea and porcelain. The Qing [[CHING]] and British empires fought two wars named for, for ten points, what illicit drug later used to produce heroin?
Answer: Opium poppy (

6012. This city's "Large Theater" Stabian Baths were built from the riches brought back from the Grecian campaigns of Lucius Mummius. In this city, a bordello known as the Lupanar, or "Wolf's Den," contained a fresco of the fertility deity Priapus [[pree-AH-puhs]. While leading rescue efforts in the harbor of the nearby city of Stabiae, Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder died when falling molten rock collided with his galley. For ten points, identify this city of Southern Italy that was destroyed along with Herculaneum in the eruption of Mount Vesuvius.
Answer: Pompeii (

6013. Working with General David Canaberro, this general established the Juliana Republic in southern Brazil. This man was infuriated by an agreement made at Plombières [[plohm- BEE-air]], which promised to cede his home city of Nice to France. This leader of the "Hunters of the Alps" aligned with the Colorados during the Uruguayan Civil War, after which he returned to his home country to lead the Expedition of the Thousand to Sicily. For ten points, name this Italian general, considered a father of the First Italian Republic.
Answer: Giuseppe Garibaldi (or Giuseppe Maria Garibaldi) BONUS: Which Italian

6014. This country named Frederick Charles of Hesse as its king in the aftermath of its 1918 Civil War. The Terijoki government claimed to represent this country's defeated Socialists, and the Lapua movement was a political party that was banned in this country following an attempted insurrection in Mäntsälä. Despite Carl Mannerheim's resistance, this country lost control of much of Karelia following the Winter War. For ten points, name this country that fought a German-supported faction in the Battle of Helsinki.
Answer: Republic of Finland (

6015. For years, scholars suspected that several frescoes in the Hall of the Five Hundred at the Palazzo Vecchio were painted over this man's historical work, The Battle of Anghiari. Under the patronage of Ludovico Sforza, this man developed a design for a "turtle-shell" fighting vehicle as well as a self-propelled cart and an automaton, though most of his work went unpublished due to being written in a secretive mirror script. For ten points, name this painter and inventor who is considered the consummate "Renaissance Man."
Answer: Leonardo da Vinci (

6016. This acquisition was retroactively confirmed by the decision American Insurance Co. v. Canter. Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin informed the sitting president that this acquisition was protected by the treaty-making provision in the Constitution. The costliness of the Haitian revolution led to this sale of territory by Napoleon to the United States. The Jefferson administration facilitated, for ten points, what "Purchase" which doubled the size of the United States?
Answer: Louisiana Purchase BONUS: The territory of the Louisiana Purchase was explored by which duo of officers who led the Corps of Discovery? Lewis and Clark (or Merriweather Lewis and William Clark

6017. An invention produced by Andreas Flocken is often considered the first "true" one of these objects, which were also produced by Walter Bersey in London. The development of MOSFET helped spark the modern commercial interest in these objects, whose first mass- produced example was the Roadster. Initially eclipsed by the emergence of internal- combustion engine vehicles, for ten points, what are these vehicles run entirely without gasoline, including the popular Tesla Model 3?
Answer: Electric Car (

6018. Successful commanders from this kingdom were often equated to the god Montu, a war deity who takes the shape of a bull. This polity employed the Medjay, a distinct Cushitic speaking people who served as a paramilitary police force. This kingdom created the sickle shaped sword meant for close-combat known as the Khopesh, and its military mass-adopted the chariot after being invaded by the Hyksos [[HIK-sohs]]. For ten points, name this ancient African kingdom which fought at the Battles of Megiddo and the Nile Delta.
Answer: Kingdom of Egypt (

6019. A tyrant of this city named Dionysius the Elder arrested the philosopher Plato and sold him into slavery following a disagreement. A former general of Pyrrhus of Epirus, Hiero II, served as a tyrant of this city, becoming a client of Rome during the First Punic War. Archimedes allegedly used a parabolic reflector to defend this city from a Roman attack, inventing the first "heat ray." For ten points, name this ancient Greek colony in the southeast of Sicily.
Answer: Syracuse (

6020. A subset of the "Great Railroad Strike of 1877" in this city included strikers trapping police officers on the Halsted Street bridge in the Battle of the Viaduct. During the "Red Summer," this city suffered a race riot on its South Side after African-American teen Eugene Williams was killed for swimming near an "All-White" beach. This city's Hyde Park neighborhood hosted the Columbian Exposition of 1893. Hull House was founded in, for ten points, which Midwestern city that suffered a "Great Fire" in the 1870s?
Answer: Chicago BONUS: Contributing to the violence of the Chicago Race Riot, the Hamburg Athletic Club, which included future mayor Richard J. Daley, was composed primarily of what white immigrant ethnic group that fiercely guarded neighborhoods like Bridgeport and Back of the Yards. Irish-Americans Third Quarter The categories are:

6021. Capital city of Colombia, which was secured following the Battle of Boyacá.
Answer: Bogota

6022. Central American state which broke away from Colombia in 1903 with U.S. backing.
Answer: Republic of Panama (or República de Panamá)

6023. "Liberator" of South America who became the first president of Gran Colombia.
Answer: Simón Bolívar (or Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Ponte Palacios y Blanco)

6024. 1980s head of the Medellin [[meh-deh-YEEN]] cartel known as the "King of Cocaine."
Answer: Pablo Escobar

6025. Former Marxist-Leninist insurgent group in Colombia which utilized kidnapping and ransom.
Answer: FARC (

6026. Spanish viceroyalty which included modern-day Colombia, Venezuela, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Answer: Viceroyalty of New Granada (

6027. Polish capital which names a "Pact" of Communist nations led by the Soviet Union.
Answer: Warsaw (

6028. British prime minister who coined the term "Iron Curtain" in a 1946 speech.
Answer: Winston Churchill (or Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill)

6029. 1949 Collective Security organization including most Western European nations and the United States.
Answer: North Atlantic Treaty Organization (

6030. Conference in Crimea where the Allies agreed on how to split Europe.
Answer: Yalta Conference (

6031. "Movement" advocated by the likes of Kwame Nkrumah and Josip Tito as an alternative to the Eastern and Western blocs.
Answer: Non-Aligned Movement (

6032. Nation whose dictator Enver Hoxha [[HOH-shah]] re-aligned his state from the USSR to Communist China in the 1960s.
Answer: People's Socialist Republic of Albania (or Republika Popullore Socialiste e Shqipërisë)Spring League

6033. Country where Daniel Malan formalized apartheid in 1948?
Answer: Republic of South Africa (or RSA)

6034. Longtime prisoner who negotiated an end to apartheid with F.W. de Klerk before becoming president?
Answer: Nelson Mandela (or Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela)

6035. 1960 incident in which police killed 69 anti-passbook protestors?
Answer: Sharpeville Massacre

6036. Popular English sport played on the controversial "Springbok tour" in 1981?
Answer: Rugby (union)

6037. Common name for the Black "homelands" granted sham independence starting in 1972?
Answer: BantustansSpring League

6038. The Statute of Laborers attempted to control wages following this event in England. Clement VI [[THE SIXTH]] tried to protect himself during this event by surrounding himself with torches, (+) and flagellants became common during this event. This event started in Europe when a Mongol army catapulted dead (*) bodies into the city of Kaffa. This event was caused by fleas from rats disseminating the bacteria Yersinia [[YER-sin-ee-ah]] pestis. For ten points, name this event in which a namesake disease ravaged Europe during the 14th century.
Answer: The Black Death (or the Bubonic Plague)

6039. A tableau by this artist depicts the historical Battle of Taillebourg [[TIE-bur]] during the Saintonge [[sahn-TAHNG]] War. While an attaché to a diplomatic envoy to the Kingdom of (+) Morocco, this artist painted the Orientalist work Women of Algiers. The toppling of Charles X [[the Tenth]] is represented by this artist in a painting depicting a bare-breasted women carrying the tricolour [[tree-koh-LOHR]] flag of France. Liberty (*) Leading the People was painted by, for ten points, which French Romantic artist?
Answer: Eugène Delacroix (or Ferdinand Victor Eugène Delacroix)

6040. The Sook Ching massacre occurred in this country, which was the southernmost of the Straits Settlements. Wired magazine writer William Gibson described this country as "Disneyland with the Death Penalty" in reference to harsh punishments such as (+) caning that are practiced by this country. Lee Kuan Yew was the first prime minister of this country that gained independence from (*) Malaysia following its foundation as a British trading post by Stamford Raffles. For ten points, name this wealthy Southeast Asian country with a majority Chinese population.
Answer: Republic of Singapore

6041. This non-Chinese figure trained at the Whampoa Military Academy and offered David Ben-Gurion and the Jewish people a homeland in his nation. This politician used the pseudonym "Nguyen [[WHEN]] the (+) Patriot" while writing articles prior to the Versailles Peace Talks. This man led the 1945 August General Uprising which successfully deposed the colonial French following the nine-year First (*) Indochina War. The city of Saigon was renamed in honor of, for ten points, which first president of communist Vietnam?
Answer: Ho Chi Minh (or Nguyễn Sinh Cung)Spring League

6042. English words such as "Person" and "Military" may have derived from this civilization that spoke an isolated Tyrsenian language. This civilization is usually identified with the Villanovan culture, and its people became the ancestors of modern (+) Tuscany. This European civilization, from whom King Tarquin the Proud was a descendant, was assimilated by (*) Roman encroachment from its south. For ten points, identify this ancient Italian civilization that was once centered on the region of Etruria.
Answer: Etruscans (

6043. Soe Naing was the first of over a hundred journalists from this nation to be imprisoned in 2021, with many being placed in the Insein Prison first run by the State Law and Order (+) Restoration Council. 2020 election results in this nation were annulled following a coup by the Tatmadaw [[taht-MAH-"tau"]] armed forces. That coup removed Aung (*) San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] from power in, for ten points, which southeast Asian nation, once known as Burma?
Answer: Myanmar (

6044. This man compared the extinction of civilization to that of a species in his 1910 Romanes lecture Biological Analogies in History. A late 1880s winter killed much of this man's cattle, forcing him to abandon his ranching venture at Elkhorn. With his son, (+) Kermit, this man headed a namesake expedition with the Smithsonian, collecting over 11,000 animal specimens and authoring African Game Trails. (*) For ten points, name this U.S. president, whose saving of a cub led to the creation of his namesake stuffed bear.
Answer: Theodore Roosevelt Jr. (or Teddy [a]Roosevelt

6045. Medieval historian Roger of Wendover claimed that this man offered to convert to Islam if Muhammad al-Nasir lent him military support. This man's refusal to appoint sub-prior Reginald to the post of Archbishop of (+) Canterbury led to his temporary excommunication by Innocent III. This king was temporarily deposed by the French King, Louis the Lion, after he captured half of England during the First (*) Barons' War. For ten points, name this brother of Richard the Lionheart and signer of the Magna Carta.
Answer: King John (

6046. Muslim scholar Barani writes that "not a dog and cat" was left in this city after Muhammad bin Tughluq moved the seat of his government to the Deogiri citadel. A (+) sultan of this city named Ibrahim Lodi died on the battlefield at Panipat attempting to stop Babur the Tiger's invasion. The Kashmiri, Turkman and Lahori gates of this city all lead to this city's focal point, the (*) Red Fort, which was built by Shah Jahan. For ten points, name this Indian city that was capital of a namesake sultanate and the Mughal Empire.
Answer: Delhi (

6047. The discovery of chicken bones of a specific breed suggests these people may have had contact with the Mapuche people in the 14th century. Naturalist Joseph Banks hired one of these people, Tupaia [[too-pah-EE-ah]], to serve as navigator on the Endeavour. These people used a specific type of outrigger boat known as the ama, which they used to colonize the modern-day countries of New Zealand and Hawaii. The Pacific Ocean was traversed by, for ten points, which Oceanic people whose subgroups include the Maori and Samoans?
Answer: Polynesians (

6048. During this event, the Red Cross-inspired Red Swastika Society organized mass burials to account for the rampage by the IJA. An Osaka newspaper named the Mainichi [[my- NEE-chee]] encouraged a contest during this event between two officers to behead a hundred enemy soldiers by katana. This 1937 atrocity was likely spearheaded by the son-in-law of Emperor Meiji, Prince Yasuhiko Asaka. For ten points, name this "massacre perpetrated by the Japanese Army on the citizens of an Eastern Chinese city.
Answer: Nanking Massacre (

6049. The first engagement in this war began in Wallachia at the Battle of Oltenita. This war's Danubian phase ended when Omar Pasha defeated Prince Gorchakov at Silistria. In one battle in this war, only the ship Taif [[TAH-eef]] escaped an attack by Pavel Nakhimov at Sinope [[SIH-noh-pee]]. This war included battles at Malakoff redoubt and the Great Redan by French and British forces as part of the Siege of Sevastopol, an effort to capture the Tsar's Black Sea Fleet. For ten points, name this 1853 to 1856 war between Russia and an Ottoman- European coalition.
Answer: Crimean War

6050. This man refused one title as part of the terms of a remonstrance known as the Humble Petition for Advice. The Heads of Proposals was promoted by a man whose body was exhumed alongside that of this man, Henry Ireton. Brought to power through the Instrument of Government, this man’s military reforms prompted the creation of the New Model Army. The Rump Parliament was replaced by the Barebone’s Parliament at the behest of this man who established a commonwealth following the death of Charles I. For ten points, name this 'Lord Protector' who came to power in the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver CromwellSpring League

6051. When this group began to overrun the FANK, the U.S. initiated Operation Eagle Pull to evacuate personnel. This regime closed most schools as part of its campaign against the "New People" and used a former high school building as "Security Prison 21." This party's government killed over a quarter of its country's population at sites known as "Killing Fields." For ten points, name this Communist party led by Pol Pot that controlled Cambodia in the late 1970s.
Answer: Khmer Rouge

6052. To create votives of this substance, the Ancient Greeks used the Sphyrelaton, or the "Hammer Elongated" method. Despite being known as the "Iron Man of India," Vallabhbhai Patel is depicted using this substance in the tallest statue on Earth, the Statue of Unity. Rodin [[roh-DAHN]] faced false accusations that he used a real person as the mold for his lifelike sculpture, The Age of [this metal]. The Little Mermaid in Copenhagen and The Thinker are cast in, for ten points, which historically valued metal alloy composed of Copper and Tin?
Answer: Bronze (

6053. This state failed to prevent a siege of their suzerainty, the Republic of Poljica, during the protracted Morean Wars. A leader of this city, Marino Faliero, was executed by its Council of Ten following a 14th-century coup to oust this city's aristocratic oligarchy. During this city's siege of Athens, its artillery shells ignited munitions stored by Ottoman viziers that caused extensive damage to the Acropolis and total destruction of the Parthenon. For ten points, identify this Italian maritime republic led by Enrico Dandolo and other doges.
Answer: Venice (

6054. Auguste Mariette led an effort to clear this monument of debris prior to a visit by the Emperor of Brazil, Pedro II. Historians discovered that several 18th dynasty rulers may have suffered from familial epilepsy due to the Dream Stele [[STEE-lee]] situated in front of this monument. A now debunked theory claimed this monument lost its nose to cannon fire from Napoleon's army during the Battle of the Pyramids. The Pharaoh Khafre is depicted with the body of a lion in, for ten points, which monumental statue in Giza?
Answer: Great Sphinx of GizaSpring League

6055. This king launched an invasion of Ireland after an invitation by Dermot MacMurrough [[MACK MUR-uh]]. Three sons of this king and his wife, led by Henry “the Young King,” rose up against him in the Great Revolt. This king’s knights killed Thomas Becket after he asked whether anyone “would rid him of this troublesome priest,” and he was the second husband of Eleanor of Aquitaine [[AK-wa-tayn]]. For ten points, name this English king and father of Richard the Lionheart who led the the Angevin [[AN-ja-vin]] Empire to its greatest extent.
Answer: Henry II of England (

6056. This country's first president was Grégoire Kayibanda, who persecuted an ethnic group known for its cattle-herding. Under his successor, the RTLM radio station and Kangura magazine incited hatred towards that group in this country, referring to them as "tall trees" to be cut down. After its president's plane was shot down in 1994, this country suffered a series of massacres until Paul Kagame's [[kah-GAH-mehs]] "Patriotic Front" seized control of the government. For ten points, name this country where a genocide occurred against the Tutsi people.
Answer: Republic of Rwanda (

6057. The "phantom time hypothesis" claims that in this century, Pope Sylvester II and Otto III made up three centuries of European history to legitimize Otto's claim to the Holy Roman Empire. In this century, Callinicus [[kah-lee-NYE-kuss]] of Heliopolis created the incendiary "Greek Fire" weapon. Byzantine Emperor Heraclius lost the possessions of Roman Syria and Egypt to the Rashidun Caliphate in this century. Islam emerged during, for ten points, what early medieval century?
Answer: Seventhth Century (

6058. This ruler allegedly rose to power by killing 99 of his half-brothers in a succession dispute following the death of his father, Bindusara. After committing mass atrocities during the Kalinga War, this ruler converted to Buddhism and wrote a set of edicts carved into rocks and pillars. This ruler built an elaborate torture chamber disguised as a beautiful palace, which was known as his namesake "Hell." For ten points, name this grandson of Chandragupta who led the Mauryan empire.
Answer: Ashoka Maurya (

6059. This country's first dictator renamed the month of April after his mother. That dictator of this country also renamed the days of the week after concepts in his Ruhnama, a book that, alongside marble statues of Akhal-Teke horses, has contributed to his and his successor's personality cults. This country's current dictator drove around a natural gas crater known as the Gates of Hell. For ten points, name this post-Soviet state ruled by Saparmurat [[suh-PAR-moo-raht]] Niyazov and Gurbanguly [[GUR-bin-GUHL-ee]] Berdimuhamedow [[BIRD-ee-moo-HAHM-uh-dov]].
Answer: Turkmenistan (or Turkmenia) BONUS: This Russian energy monopoly provides natural gas to other former countries of the Soviet Union where the commodity remains a significant component of the economy. PJSC Gazprom

6060. While serving as a captain in the German army, Otto Jaekal [[YEH-kul]] excavated for these animals in the mines of the occupied Belgian town of Bernissart. The rivalry between American scientists Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh led to the "Bone Wars," a period of discovery of this general class of animals. The ancient Chinese believed to have found "dragon bones" after discovering the remains of, for ten points, what general class of reptiles which include T. Rex?
Answer: Dinosaurs (

6061. The Malgré-nous [[mal-GRAY NOOS]] were soldiers forcibly conscripted from this region, whose northwestern part has been referred to as "Moselle." The town of Belfort was deliberately excluded from this region, the only one in France to recognize Christianity and Judaism as official religions. Metz and Strasbourg were part of this region, which, due to disputes between Bavaria and Prussia, was made an "Imperial Territory" of Germany. For ten points, name this region annexed by Germany after the Franco-Prussian War.
Answer: Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine (

6062. It's not Cro-Magnons, but these people are hypothesized to have created the oldest known musical instrument, the "Divje Babe [[div-YEH BAH-beh]] Flute." This species' namesake 2010 genome project revealed that non-African homo sapiens often intermixed with this people's "Altai Mountain" branch. A valley in Germany names, for ten points, which extinct human species known for protruding foreheads and comparatively shorter limbs than modern humans?
Answer: Neanderthals (

6063. Primarily Black neighborhood that rioted following the death of Martin Luther King?
Answer: Harlem

6064. Former Nation of Islam spokesman assassinated in the Audubon Ballroom in 1965?
Answer: Malcolm X (or Malcolm Little; or el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz)

6065. New name given to Idlewild Airport in 1963, following the assassination of a president?
Answer: JFK Airport (or John F. Kennedy Inter

6066. Greenwich Village gay bar whose patrons confronted police in June 1969?
Answer: Stonewall Inn

6067. Historic railroad station in NYC that was demolished in 1963?
Answer: Penn Station

6068. Bank whose tower at 270 Park Avenue was completed in 1960, only to become the tallest voluntarily demolished building in history in 2021?
Answer: JPMorgan Chase & Co. (

6069. Two-time Conservative prime minister of Jewish ancestry?
Answer: Benjamin Disraeli

6070. Controversial laws restricting the import of grain repealed in 1846?
Answer: Corn Laws

6071. Opponent of the Conservatives that was later overshadowed by the Labour Party in the early twentieth century.
Answer: Liberal Party (or Liberals

6072. Series of laws expanding suffrage starting in 1832?
Answer: Reform Bills

6073. Foreign Secretary who intervened in the Don Pacifico Affair and became prime minister during the American Civil War?
Answer: Lord Palmerston (or Henry John Temple)

6074. Conservative-leaning political humor magazine that popularized regular political cartoons in the 1840s?
Answer: PunchSpring League

6075. Emperor of Japan during the war?
Answer: Hirohito (or Shōwa)

6076. Long-range carrier-based fighter planes that were used in most of Japan's naval battles?
Answer: Zero (or Zeke

6077. Initial commander-in-chief of naval forces for Japan in the War of the Pacific.
Answer: Isoroku Yamamoto

6078. American battleship on which the formal instrument of surrender was signed on September 2, 1945?
Answer: USS Missouri

6079. Skirmish outside of Beijing that started the Japanese invasion of China?
Answer: Marco Polo Bridge Incident (

6080. Name for the emperor's recorded announcement of initial surrender?
Answer: Jewel Voice broadcast (or Gyokuon-hōsō broadcast)Spring League

6081. Frenchman George Psalmanazar pretended to be from this region in the 18th century, even constructing an alphabet from scratch and doing odd habits like eating raw meat with cardamom to prove his foreignness. After expelling the Dutch from this region, (+) Ming Loyalist Coxinga [[coh-shin-GAH]] established the short-lived Tungning Kingdom in its south during the 17th century. The Urheimat of Austronesian languages is found on this island in the (*) South China Sea. The Chinese Nationalists formed the Republic of China on, for ten points, what East Asian island?
Answer: Taiwan (

6082. Though it was written for publication in The New York Times Magazine, this document was not published there despite protests from editor Harvey Shapiro. This document was written in response to “A Call (+) for Unity," an open letter by white clergymen referring to this document's author as an "outsider." Claiming "injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere," (*) for ten points, which open letter was written from a cell by Martin Luther King Jr.?
Answer: Letter from Birmingham Jail (

6083. A memoir set during this war titled Storm of Steel was written by Ernst Jünger [[YUHN-ger]], the youngest ever winner of the Pour le Mérite [[meh-REET]]. Barbara Tuchman wrote a Pulitzer Prize-winning historiography of this war titled The Guns (+) of August. Winston Churchill published The World Crisis concerning this war, including his own failures during its Dardanelles Campaign at (*) Gallipoli. For ten points, name this early 20th-century war whose literary masterpieces include All Quiet on the Western Front.
Answer: World War One (

6084. Robert Burnell served as chancellor to this king, who enforced substitution as the only means of alienating lands by the terms of the statute, Quia Emptores. Oliver Cromwell overturned a policy set by this man that removed one ethnic group over suspicion of blood libel, as well as their practice of usury. The Edict of (+) Expulsion of the Jews was passed by this man, whose forces were defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. This son of Henry III captured and hanged William (*) Wallace of Scotland. For ten points, name this English king who was nicknamed for his height.
Answer: Edward I of England (

6085. After this conflict, the Dikla and Yamit outposts were established in a territory that was occupied for fifteen years by this war's winner. This conflict erupted a few weeks after the closure of the Straits of Tiran to shipping, and it included the confused attack on the (+) USS Liberty. Yitzhak Rabin disobeyed orders from Moshe Dayan and advanced into the Gaza Strip during this war, in which the Sinai Peninsula and West Bank was seized by the (*) IGF. For ten points, identify this June 1967 clash between Israel and three Arab states, named for its brief duration.
Answer: Six-Day War (or Milhemet Sheshet Ha Yamim; or an-Naksah

6086. A king of this dynasty told a historian to not record his fall from a horse, but that scholar included it anyways in The Veritable Records of [this dynasty]. That king of this dynasty ordered the Gihae (+) Expedition, which seized the island of Tsushima [[soo-SHE-mah]] from Wokou pirates from Japan. Another ruler of this dynasty created the script (*) Hangul to end the reliance on Classical Chinese. Taejong and Sejong the Great were monarchs of, for ten points, what long-ruling dynasty of Korea?
Answer: Choseon Dynasty (

6087. This park's 50 square mile "Zone of Death" is a region where you can theoretically get away with murder according to a thought experiment by legal scholar Brian Kalt. Frank Jay Haynes became the official photographer of this park, recording Rutherford B. (+) Hayes' visit there while fighting poor health. The Washburn Expedition of 1870 explored this parks Upper and Lower Geyser Basin, naming the largest one (*) "Old Faithful." The oldest national park in the U.S. is, for ten points, what nature reserve that lies in Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana?
Answer: Yellowstone

6088. Many native names in this language come from a tradition known as the "Dream Name," where a name is chosen by a pregnant mother after a visitor appears to her while asleep. This language, which has an official committee on what children can be (+) named, formed an unusual pidgin with Basque due to Iberian whalers needing to communicate with locals. Snorri Sturluson wrote the Prose Edda in an early form of this tongue, describing the creation of the Aesir [[AY-seer]]. Old (*) Norse is most-closely related to, for ten points, what Germanic language spoken in Reykjavík?
Answer: Icelandic (or Islenska

6089. In this nation, the 2007 April Unrest occurred due to the relocation of a memorial to fallen Red Army soldiers, resulting in this nation's Moscow embassy being besieged for a week. The domination of this state's Vaps Movement led to to a period dubbed the (+) "Era of Silence," and its president, Konstantin Päts, formally submitted to a Soviet ultimatum of occupation in 1940. With (*) Lithuania and Latvia, this country achieved a non-violent independence during the Singing Revolution. For ten points, name this Baltic state that was once the target of the Livonian Crusade.
Answer: Republic of Estonia (or Eesti Vabariik) BONUS: Which "Good Emperor" was a known Grecophile who created a widespread cult to his dead lover, Antinous? Hadrian (

6090. The discovery of chicken bones of a specific breed suggests these people may have had contact with the Mapuche people in the 14th century. Naturalist Joseph Banks hired one of these people, Tupaia [[too-pah-EE-ah]], to serve as navigator on the Endeavour. These people used a specific type of outrigger boat known as the ama, which they used to colonize the modern-day countries of New Zealand and Hawaii. The Pacific Ocean was traversed by, for ten points, which Oceanic people whose subgroups include the Maori and Samoans?
Answer: Polynesians (

6091. During this event, the Red Cross-inspired Red Swastika Society organized mass burials to account for the rampage by the IJA. An Osaka newspaper named the Mainichi [[my- NEE-chee]] encouraged a contest during this event between two officers to behead a hundred enemy soldiers by katana. This 1937 atrocity was likely spearheaded by the son-in-law of Emperor Meiji, Prince Yasuhiko Asaka. For ten points, name this "massacre perpetrated by the Japanese Army on the citizens of an Eastern Chinese city.
Answer: Nanking Massacre (

6092. The first engagement in this war began in Wallachia at the Battle of Oltenita. This war's Danubian phase ended when Omar Pasha defeated Prince Gorchakov at Silistria. In one battle in this war, only the ship Taif [[TAH-eef]] escaped an attack by Pavel Nakhimov at Sinope [[SIH-noh-pee]]. This war included battles at Malakoff redoubt and the Great Redan by French and British forces as part of the Siege of Sevastopol, an effort to capture the Tsar's Black Sea Fleet. For ten points, name this 1853 to 1856 war between Russia and an Ottoman- European coalition.
Answer: Crimean War

6093. This man refused one title as part of the terms of a remonstrance known as the Humble Petition for Advice. The Heads of Proposals was promoted by a man whose body was exhumed alongside that of this man, Henry Ireton. Brought to power through the Instrument of Government, this man’s military reforms prompted the creation of the New Model Army. The Rump Parliament was replaced by the Barebone’s Parliament at the behest of this man who established a commonwealth following the death of Charles I. For ten points, name this 'Lord Protector' who came to power in the English Civil War.
Answer: Oliver CromwellSpring League

6094. Athenian tyrant Perillos died in this specific manner using an apparatus called the "Brazen Bull," which he supposedly invented. Buddhist monk Thích Quảng Đức [[THICK KWAN DOOK]] performed this action on himself to protest the persecution of his fellow monks in South Vietnam. Hammurabi decreed arsonists should be executed via this method in his namesake "Code." Christian heretics were most often executed by, for ten points, what method also known as immolation?
Answer: Burning (

6095. To create votives of this substance, the Ancient Greeks used the Sphyrelaton, or the "Hammer Elongated" method. Despite being known as the "Iron Man of India," Vallabhbhai Patel is depicted using this substance in the tallest statue on Earth, the Statue of Unity. Rodin [[roh-DAHN]] faced false accusations that he used a real person as the mold for his lifelike sculpture, The Age of [this metal]. The Little Mermaid in Copenhagen and The Thinker are cast in, for ten points, which historically valued metal alloy composed of Copper and Tin?
Answer: Bronze (

6096. This state failed to prevent a siege of their suzerainty, the Republic of Poljica, during the protracted Morean Wars. A leader of this city, Marino Faliero, was executed by its Council of Ten following a 14th-century coup to oust this city's aristocratic oligarchy. During this city's siege of Athens, its artillery shells ignited munitions stored by Ottoman viziers that caused extensive damage to the Acropolis and total destruction of the Parthenon. For ten points, identify this Italian maritime republic led by Enrico Dandolo and other doges.
Answer: Venice (

6097. When this group began to overrun the FANK, the U.S. initiated Operation Eagle Pull to evacuate personnel. This regime closed most schools as part of its campaign against the "New People" and used a former high school building as "Security Prison 21." This party's government killed over a quarter of its country's population at sites known as "Killing Fields." For ten points, name this Communist party led by Pol Pot that controlled Cambodia in the late 1970s.
Answer: Khmer RougeSpring League

6098. Auguste Mariette led an effort to clear this monument of debris prior to a visit by the Emperor of Brazil, Pedro II. Historians discovered that several 18th dynasty rulers may have suffered from familial epilepsy due to the Dream Stele [[STEE-lee]] situated in front of this monument. A now debunked theory claimed this monument lost its nose to cannon fire from Napoleon's army during the Battle of the Pyramids. The Pharaoh Khafre is depicted with the body of a lion in, for ten points, which monumental statue in Giza?
Answer: Great Sphinx of Giza

6099. This man was deemed a "White Jew" in an editorial in Das Schwarze Korps, the SS newspaper, after he was named "favorite" to head the Munich Faculty. With a set of scientists, including Walther Gerlach, this physicist was detained in England through Operation Epsilon to determine how close the Nazis were to creating an atomic bomb. Albert Einstein nominated this scientist for a 1932 Nobel Prize in Physics he won for determining limits to predicting physical quantities of particles. An "Uncertainty Principle" is named for, for ten points, which "Father of Quantum Mechanics"?
Answer: Werner Heisenberg (or Werner Karl Heisenberg

6100. This king launched an invasion of Ireland after an invitation by Dermot MacMurrough [[MACK MUR-uh]]. Three sons of this king and his wife, led by Henry “the Young King,” rose up against him in the Great Revolt. This king’s knights killed Thomas Becket after he asked whether anyone “would rid him of this troublesome priest,” and he was the second husband of Eleanor of Aquitaine [[AK-wa-tayn]]. For ten points, name this English king and father of Richard the Lionheart who led the the Angevin [[AN-ja-vin]] Empire to its greatest extent.
Answer: Henry II of England (

6101. This country's first president was Grégoire Kayibanda, who persecuted an ethnic group known for its cattle-herding. Under his successor, the RTLM radio station and Kangura magazine incited hatred towards that group in this country, referring to them as "tall trees" to be cut down. After its president's plane was shot down in 1994, this country suffered a series of massacres until Paul Kagame's [[kah-GAH-mehs]] "Patriotic Front" seized control of the government. For ten points, name this country where a genocide occurred against the Tutsi people.
Answer: Republic of Rwanda (

6102. The "phantom time hypothesis" claims that in this century, Pope Sylvester II and Otto III made up three centuries of European history to legitimize Otto's claim to the Holy Roman Empire. In this century, Callinicus [[kah-lee-NYE-kuss]] of Heliopolis created the incendiary "Greek Fire" weapon. Byzantine Emperor Heraclius lost the possessions of Roman Syria and Egypt to the Rashidun Caliphate in this century. Islam emerged during, for ten points, what early medieval century?
Answer: Seventhth Century (

6103. This ruler allegedly rose to power by killing 99 of his half-brothers in a succession dispute following the death of his father, Bindusara. After committing mass atrocities during the Kalinga War, this ruler converted to Buddhism and wrote a set of edicts carved into rocks and pillars. This ruler built an elaborate torture chamber disguised as a beautiful palace, which was known as his namesake "Hell." For ten points, name this grandson of Chandragupta who led the Mauryan empire.
Answer: Ashoka Maurya (

6104. This country's first dictator renamed the month of April after his mother. That dictator of this country also renamed the days of the week after concepts in his Ruhnama, a book that, alongside marble statues of Akhal-Teke horses, has contributed to his and his successor's personality cults. This country's current dictator drove around a natural gas crater known as the Gates of Hell. For ten points, name this post-Soviet state ruled by Saparmurat [[suh-PAR-moo-raht]] Niyazov and Gurbanguly [[GUR-bin-GUHL-ee]] Berdimuhamedow [[BIRD-ee-moo-HAHM-uh-dov]].
Answer: Turkmenistan (or Turkmenia) BONUS: This Russian energy monopoly provides natural gas to other former countries of the Soviet Union where the commodity remains a significant component of the economy. PJSC Gazprom

6105. While serving as a captain in the German army, Otto Jaekal [[YEH-kul]] excavated for these animals in the mines of the occupied Belgian town of Bernissart. The rivalry between American scientists Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh led to the "Bone Wars," a period of discovery of this general class of animals. The ancient Chinese believed to have found "dragon bones" after discovering the remains of, for ten points, what general class of reptiles which include T. Rex?
Answer: Dinosaurs (

6106. The Malgré-nous [[mal-GRAY NOOS]] were soldiers forcibly conscripted from this region, whose northwestern part has been referred to as "Moselle." The town of Belfort was deliberately excluded from this region, the only one in France to recognize Christianity and Judaism as official religions. Metz and Strasbourg were part of this region, which, due to disputes between Bavaria and Prussia, was made an "Imperial Territory" of Germany. For ten points, name this region annexed by Germany after the Franco-Prussian War.
Answer: Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine (

6107. It's not Cro-Magnons, but these people are hypothesized to have created the oldest known musical instrument, the "Divje Babe [[div-YEH BAH-beh]] Flute." This species' namesake 2010 genome project revealed that non-African homo sapiens often intermixed with this people's "Altai Mountain" branch. A valley in Germany names, for ten points, which extinct human species known for protruding foreheads and comparatively shorter limbs than modern humans?
Answer: Neanderthals (

6108. Primarily Black neighborhood that rioted following the death of Martin Luther King?
Answer: Harlem

6109. Former Nation of Islam spokesman assassinated in the Audubon Ballroom in 1965?
Answer: Malcolm X (or Malcolm Little; or el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz)

6110. New name given to Idlewild Airport in 1963, following the assassination of a president?
Answer: JFK Airport (or John F. Kennedy Inter

6111. Greenwich Village gay bar whose patrons confronted police in June 1969?
Answer: Stonewall Inn

6112. Historic railroad station in NYC that was demolished in 1963?
Answer: Penn Station

6113. Highway advocate who ended his long tenure as city Parks and Planning commissioner in 1960?
Answer: Robert Moses

6114. Bank whose tower at 270 Park Avenue was completed in 1960, only to become the tallest voluntarily demolished building in history in 2021?
Answer: JPMorgan Chase & Co. (

6115. Democratic mayor from 1954 to 1965 who quit the New York Athletic Club for barring Black and Jewish membership?
Answer: Robert F. Wagner (or Robert Ferdinand Wagner II)Spring League

6116. Two-time Conservative prime minister of Jewish ancestry?
Answer: Benjamin Disraeli

6117. Controversial laws restricting the import of grain repealed in 1846?
Answer: Corn Laws

6118. Opponent of the Conservatives that was later overshadowed by the Labour Party in the early twentieth century.
Answer: Liberal Party (or Liberals

6119. Series of laws expanding suffrage starting in 1832?
Answer: Reform Bills

6120. Foreign Secretary who intervened in the Don Pacifico Affair and became prime minister during the American Civil War?
Answer: Lord Palmerston (or Henry John Temple)

6121. Conservative-leaning political humor magazine that popularized regular political cartoons in the 1840s?
Answer: Punch

6122. 1839 constitutional crisis over monarchial power to choose ceremonial personal attendants?
Answer: Bedchamber Crisis

6123. Nickname given by the deaf Duke of Wellington to Lord Derby's 1852 cabinet containing many political unknowns?
Answer: Who? Who? MinistrySpring League

6124. Emperor of Japan during the war?
Answer: Hirohito (or Shōwa)

6125. Long-range carrier-based fighter planes that were used in most of Japan's naval battles?
Answer: Zero (or Zeke

6126. Initial commander-in-chief of naval forces for Japan in the War of the Pacific.
Answer: Isoroku Yamamoto

6127. American battleship on which the formal instrument of surrender was signed on September 2, 1945?
Answer: USS Missouri

6128. Skirmish outside of Beijing that started the Japanese invasion of China?
Answer: Marco Polo Bridge Incident (

6129. Name for the emperor's recorded announcement of initial surrender?
Answer: Jewel Voice broadcast (or Gyokuon-hōsō broadcast)

6130. Enormous, multi-industry conglomerates mostly broken up after the war?
Answer: Zaibatsu (or Financial Cliques)

6131. Late 1944 major offensive in China to open a land route to French Indochina?
Answer: Operation Ichi-Go (or Tairiku Datsū Sakusen; or Battle of Battle of Henan- Hunan-Guangxi)Spring League

6132. Frenchman George Psalmanazar pretended to be from this region in the 18th century, even constructing an alphabet from scratch and doing odd habits like eating raw meat with cardamom to prove his foreignness. After expelling the Dutch from this region, (+) Ming Loyalist Coxinga [[coh-shin-GAH]] established the short-lived Tungning Kingdom in its south during the 17th century. The Urheimat of Austronesian languages is found on this island in the (*) South China Sea. The Chinese Nationalists formed the Republic of China on, for ten points, what East Asian island?
Answer: Taiwan (

6133. Though it was written for publication in The New York Times Magazine, this document was not published there despite protests from editor Harvey Shapiro. This document was written in response to “A Call (+) for Unity," an open letter by white clergymen referring to this document's author as an "outsider." Claiming "injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere," (*) for ten points, which open letter was written from a cell by Martin Luther King Jr.?
Answer: Letter from Birmingham Jail (

6134. A memoir set during this war titled Storm of Steel was written by Ernst Jünger [[YUHN-ger]], the youngest ever winner of the Pour le Mérite [[meh-REET]]. Barbara Tuchman wrote a Pulitzer Prize-winning historiography of this war titled The Guns (+) of August. Winston Churchill published The World Crisis concerning this war, including his own failures during its Dardanelles Campaign at (*) Gallipoli. For ten points, name this early 20th-century war whose literary masterpieces include All Quiet on the Western Front.
Answer: World War One (

6135. Robert Burnell served as chancellor to this king, who enforced substitution as the only means of alienating lands by the terms of the statute, Quia Emptores. Oliver Cromwell overturned a policy set by this man that removed one ethnic group over suspicion of blood libel, as well as their practice of usury. The Edict of (+) Expulsion of the Jews was passed by this man, whose forces were defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. This son of Henry III captured and hanged William (*) Wallace of Scotland. For ten points, name this English king who was nicknamed for his height.
Answer: Edward I of England (

6136. After this conflict, the Dikla and Yamit outposts were established in a territory that was occupied for fifteen years by this war's winner. This conflict erupted a few weeks after the closure of the Straits of Tiran to shipping, and it included the confused attack on the (+) USS Liberty. Yitzhak Rabin disobeyed orders from Moshe Dayan and advanced into the Gaza Strip during this war, in which the Sinai Peninsula and West Bank was seized by the (*) IGF. For ten points, identify this June 1967 clash between Israel and three Arab states, named for its brief duration.
Answer: Six-Day War (or Milhemet Sheshet Ha Yamim; or an-Naksah

6137. A king of this dynasty told a historian to not record his fall from a horse, but that scholar included it anyways in The Veritable Records of [this dynasty]. That king of this dynasty ordered the Gihae (+) Expedition, which seized the island of Tsushima [[soo-SHE-mah]] from Wokou pirates from Japan. Another ruler of this dynasty created the script (*) Hangul to end the reliance on Classical Chinese. Taejong and Sejong the Great were monarchs of, for ten points, what long-ruling dynasty of Korea?
Answer: Choseon Dynasty (

6138. This park's 50 square mile "Zone of Death" is a region where you can theoretically get away with murder according to a thought experiment by legal scholar Brian Kalt. Frank Jay Haynes became the official photographer of this park, recording Rutherford B. (+) Hayes' visit there while fighting poor health. The Washburn Expedition of 1870 explored this parks Upper and Lower Geyser Basin, naming the largest one (*) "Old Faithful." The oldest national park in the U.S. is, for ten points, what nature reserve that lies in Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana?
Answer: Yellowstone

6139. Many native names in this language come from a tradition known as the "Dream Name," where a name is chosen by a pregnant mother after a visitor appears to her while asleep. This language, which has an official committee on what children can be (+) named, formed an unusual pidgin with Basque due to Iberian whalers needing to communicate with locals. Snorri Sturluson wrote the Prose Edda in an early form of this tongue, describing the creation of the Aesir [[AY-seer]]. Old (*) Norse is most-closely related to, for ten points, what Germanic language spoken in Reykjavík?
Answer: Icelandic (or Islenska

6140. In this nation, the 2007 April Unrest occurred due to the relocation of a memorial to fallen Red Army soldiers, resulting in this nation's Moscow embassy being besieged for a week. The domination of this state's Vaps Movement led to to a period dubbed the (+) "Era of Silence," and its president, Konstantin Päts, formally submitted to a Soviet ultimatum of occupation in 1940. With (*) Lithuania and Latvia, this country achieved a non-violent independence during the Singing Revolution. For ten points, name this Baltic state that was once the target of the Livonian Crusade.
Answer: Republic of Estonia (or Eesti Vabariik) BONUS: Which "Good Emperor" was a known Grecophile who created a widespread cult to his dead lover, Antinous? Hadrian (

6141. Court painter Daniel Maclise depicted this monarch meeting a noblewoman At Hampton Court in one painting. This monarch appears on the bottom left approaching the royal party of Francis I in the landscape painting Field of the Cloth of Gold. This man employed foreigner Hans Holbein the Younger, who depicted this king in a portrait situated next to one of Jane Seymour and this man's father Henry VII [[the Seventh]]. For ten points, name this English king who is depicted in several portraits with his six wives.
Answer: Henry VIII [[the Eighth]]

6142. In this nation, the "No to Capitulation!" protests occurred in response to its government's implementation of the Steinmeier Formula. A man who played the president of this nation on the TV program Servant of the People later formed a party with that same name and won the 2019 presidential elections. That head of state openly criticized Joe Biden and NATO for not taking the late 2021 Russian build-up on this state's border seriously. Volodymyr Zelensky leads, for ten points, what nation on the Crimea?
Answer: Republic of Ukraine (or Ukraina)

6143. A member of this family wrote the book On the Art of the Cinema and ordered the kidnapping of film director Shin Sang-ok. Members of this family promote the ideology of "military first" or "Songun" and a quasi-religion called "Juche" [[JOO-cheh]]. A member of this family met with Dennis Rodman in 2013 and was rumored to be transferring power to his sister Yo-jong due to health issues in 2020. Dictators Il-sung, Jong-il, and Jong-un belong to, for ten points, what family that controls North Korea?
Answer: Kim family (

6144. In a failed attempt to prevent this event, a route along Appel Quay was decided upon by Oskar Potiorek. A false turn by Leopold Lojka [[LOY-kuh]] resulted in this event, which was preceded by a failed attack with a hand grenade. An FN Model 1910 was used to carry out this attack, which also resulted in the death of its central target’s wife, Sophie. The Black Hand helped organize this event, which was perpetrated by the Bosnian Serb Gavrilo Princip. For ten points, name this 1914 attack that killed the heir presumptive of Austria-Hungary.
Answer: Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand (

6145. In the 1970s, this man was nominated for Best Recording for Children at the Grammys for an educational album featuring [this man] and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay. Jimmy Carter tasked this athlete with a 1980 tour of Africa to endorse the boycott of the Moscow Olympics. In an effort to legitimize his regime, dictator Mobutu Sese Seko hosted a contest between this athlete and George Foreman, the so-called "Rumble in the Jungle." Cassius Clay was once the name of, for ten points, which boxer, known as "The Greatest"?
Answer: Muhammad Ali (

6146. The Moro of Mindanao declared one of these specific conflicts after the government of Ferdinand Marcos killed many of its acolytes in the Corregidor massacre. During one of these specific conflicts, scholar Usman dan Fodio united many of the Hausa independent states after being appointed "Commander of the Faithful." Ottoman sultan Mehmed V formally declared a "Great" one of these religious wars against the Allies during World War One. For ten points, name these Islamic holy wars, often considered a counterpart to a Christian "Crusade."
Answer: Jihad (

6147. This dynasty reconquered a western province after it was invaded by Uzbek adventurer Yakub Beg. A regent from this dynasty named Dorgon convinced Wu Sangui to switch to their side. One ruler of this dynasty abdicated to avoid ruling longer than his grandfather, the Kangxi [[CONG-SHEE]] Emperor. This dynasty was overthrown in the Xinhai [[SHIN-HYE]] Revolution, after which Yuan Shikai took power. This last Manchu dynasty that succeeded the Ming lost power following the Opium Wars. For ten points, name this final imperial dynasty of China.
Answer: Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty (or Great Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty)

6148. This prime minister ordered British forces to bombard Alexandria in response to the 'Urabi [[oo-RAH-bee]] revolt. The Hawarden [[HAR-den]] Kite was an infamous news scoop that suggested this man supported Irish Home Rule. This leader attacked a prominent political rival over their response to the “Bulgarian Horrors” in his Midlothian campaign. For ten points, name this four-time Liberal British prime minister during the nineteenth century and rival of Benjamin Disraeli.
Answer: William Ewart Gladstone

6149. During this war, one participant revoked their ambassador in Sweden for openly harboring deserters. Mark Satin wrote a "Manual" which taught men how to integrate into Canadian society during this war, and Arlo Guthrie recounts traveling to Whitehall Street in New York and intentionally acting mentally ill in the protest song "Alice's Restaurant Massacree." Men like Bill Clinton and Dick Cheney faced accusations of dodging, for ten points, what 1960s and 1970s conflict in Southeast Asia?
Answer: Vietnam War (

6150. This figure incorporated a band he managed, Lou Reed's Velvet Underground, into his multimedia art show, the Exploding Plastic Inevitable. This man was shot after the author of the radical feminist work, the SCUM Manifesto, Valerie Solanas, claimed he had too much control over her life. 32 Campbell's Soup Cans and the Marilyn Diptych were created by, for ten points, which American Pop artist?
Answer: Andy Warhol (or Andrew Warhola, Jr.)Spring League

6151. An impending munitions delivery from the SS Ypiranga [[ee-pee-RAHN-gah]] led to an attack in this city, which was then under a six-month occupation by one country following the Tampico Affair, which in turn led to the downfall of Victoriano Huerta. Half a century earlier, this city was the subject of the first amphibious assault in U.S. military history. Winfield Scott led an invasion of central Mexico through, for ten points, what Mexican port city?
Answer: Veracruz BONUS: This man participated in the Siege of Veracruz after having his ship, the USS Mississippi repaired due to damage during the capture of Tampico. This man later led warships against Japan, leading to the Convention of Kanagawa. Matthew C. Perry (or Matthew Calbraith Perry

6152. Architect William Thornton convinced one side during this event to spare the Patent Office, which briefly hosted Congress following this event. Partially motivated by the American invasion of Upper Canada, Robert Ross's victory at the Battle of Bladensburg led to this violent incursion. Dolley Madison saved a portrait of George Washington during, for ten points, what destructive event during the War of 1812 that followed the capture of the U.S. national capital?
Answer: Burning of Washington (

6153. The explosion of a water tank in Mayak led to a nuclear disaster in the southern portion of this range, irradiating nearby Lake Karachay. A city nestled in this range named Magnitogorsk became an industrial hub in the 1930s due to a mountain there being made up of fifty-five percent iron ore. The Council for Evacuation, or GKO, moved over 1500 factories beyond this mountain range in the midst of Operation Barbarossa. For ten points, name this mountain range that historically divided the European and Asian portions of Russia.
Answer: Ural Mountains (or Urals

6154. This character is enticed by a sign to "Join the Army and See the World" and dies in the jungles of Vietnam in an underground protest film by Whitney Lee Savage. Margaret Thatcher labelled the European Parliament with this fictional character's name due to its perceived ineffectiveness. Despite making a short appearance in Plane Crazy, this character and his paramour first appeared in the short film Steamboat Willie. Walt Disney originally voiced, for ten points, which mascot of the Disney corporation?
Answer: Mickey Mouse BONUS: Fredo claims he betrayed his brother due to being sent to run a "Mickey Mouse nightclub" in which gangster drama film revolving around the actions of the Corleone family? The Godfather

6155. This man commanded a fleet that seized a treasure worth over thirty million present- day pounds from the São Filipe [[SOW fil-EEP-ee]]. This man commanded a raid that tried to land at El Puntal [[EHL [[PUHN-tahl]] while destroying dozens of Spanish capital ships in the Bay of Cádiz, known as the "singeing [[SINJ-ing]] of the King of Spain's beard." Earlier, this man commanded the flagship Golden Hind and claimed "New Albion" in California. For ten points, name this British privateer who led a 1577 to 1580 circumnavigation of the world.
Answer: Francis Drake BONUS: Drake died while raiding Portobelo in what modern-day country, where the bulk of Scotland's disastrous Darién colony was later located? Panama (or Republic of Panama; or República de Panamá)

6156. In this modern-day country, a breakaway general who was fond of using a metaphor about plucking the tail off a horse held off Metellus Pius and Pompey for seven years. This present-day country was the location of Quintus Sertorius's attempt to rebel against Rome. Hannibal's attack on Saguntum in this present-day country began the Second Punic War. Hadrian and Trajan were both born in what is now this country. For ten points, name this country where Romans expanded cities such as Valentia, Corduba, and Toletum, or modern Toledo.
Answer: Spain (

6157. In court proceedings related to this period, French intelligence agent Bertrand de Perseval was implicated in the kidnapping of two nuns who were later killed at a torture facility known as ESMA. Admiral Luis María Mendía pioneered the use of "Death Flights" during this period in which aggressive intervention against insurgents was permitted by the Operativo Independencia. Jorge Videla rose to power during this period as part of a military junta that displaced Isabel Perón. For ten points, name this period of terror in which death squads quashed dissidents in Argentina.
Answer: The Dirty War (or Guerra sucia) BONUS: The Dirty War fell under the umbrella of this major inter

6158. These movements tend to arise when "Big Man/Rubbish Man" social systems are challenged, and one of them is named for the response given by a soldier trying to communicate his origin in America. Members of these movements might carve rifles or headsets out of wood and simulate the process of operating a control tower. The Tom Navy and John Frum movements are examples of these phenomena. For ten points, name these religious movements among Pacific islanders that await delivery of foreign goods by airplane.
Answer: Cargo Cults BONUS: One of the most prominent cargo cults is a "Movement" on Vanuatu named for this royal consort, who died in

6159. Author of The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn who coined the term "Gilded Age."
Answer: Mark Twain (or Samuel Langhorne Clemens)

6160. Scottish-born steel magnate and anti-unionist who promoted philanthropy in his "Gospel of Wealth."
Answer: Andrew Carnegie

6161. Businessman who, alongside Henry Flagler, founded Standard Oil in 1870.
Answer: John D. Rockefeller (or John Davison Rockefeller Sr.)

6162. Political machine of New York led by the infamous "Boss" Tweed which was known for its rampant corruption.
Answer: Tammany Hall (or Tammany Society

6163. Medieval term used to describe ruthlessly powerful businessmen like Cornelius Vanderbilt.
Answer: Robber Baron (

6164. Third party named for an informal term for dollars which formed to oppose the growth of monopolies.
Answer: Greenback Party (

6165. Disastrous 1887 act which aimed to subdivide Native reservations into western allotments of farmlands.
Answer: Dawes Act of

6166. Norwegian-American economist who was inspired to write The Theory of the Leisure Class in response to the excess of the Gilded Age.
Answer: Thorstein Veblen (or Thorstein Bunde Veblen)Spring League

6167. Hegemonic empire which split into three distinct sections during the Crisis of the Third Century.
Answer: Roman Empire (or Rome

6168. Popular religious group persecuted by Emperor Diocletian.
Answer: Christians (

6169. Elite Roman guards who killed emperors such as Pupienus [[poo-pee-AY-nus]], Balbinus, and Maximus Thrax.
Answer: Praetorian Guard (or Cohortēs praetōriae)

6170. Silver currency of Rome which was debased during the early crisis and virtually abandoned by the reign of Gordian III.
Answer: Denarii (

6171. Dynasty of emperors whose members included Septimius and Caracalla, whose downfall coincided with the crisis.
Answer: Severan Dynasty

6172. General and eventual emperor whose string of military victories led to the end of the crisis and his being crowned "Restorer of the World."
Answer: Aurelian (or Lucius Domitius Aurelianus)

6173. Dalmatian province of Rome that produced a series of emperors during the crisis, such as Decius and Probus.
Answer: Illyricum (

6174. Term originally used for cities bound by treaty that referred to barbarian mercenaries whose influence grew during the crisis.
Answer: Foederati (

6175. Large East Asian country whose primary ethnic group is named for the Han.
Answer: China (

6176. Royal title created by Qin [[CHIN] Shi Huang, which the Han assumed in 202 BC.
Answer: Emperor of China (or Huángdì)

6177. Technology traditionally attributed to court official Cai Lun, who used pulp from the mulberry tree.
Answer: Paper (or Papermaking)

6178. Period which followed the collapse of the Han Dynasty, witnessing warfare between the states of Wei, Shu, and Wu.
Answer: Three Kingdoms Period (or Sānguó Shídài)

6179. Massive 184 AD peasant revolt named for the garment worn by its participants.
Answer: Yellow Turban Rebellion (

6180. Confucian scholar and court official who briefly interrupted the Han with his own Xin [[SHIN]] Dynasty.
Answer: Wang Mang (

6181. Founder of the Han dynasty who defeated the Chu at Gaixia [["GUY"-SHAH]] to become sole ruler.
Answer: Liu Bang (

6182. Traditional name of Xi'an, which served as the capital of the Han dynasty.
Answer: Chang'anSpring League

6183. This kingdom lost the Battle of Guinea to its western neighbor during one war, and a previous ruler of this kingdom had earlier failed to conquer that kingdom during the Battle of Aljubarrota [[AL-ju-bar-ro-ta]]. Edward the Black Prince invaded this kingdom to support Peter the Cruel (+) during the Hundred Years’ War. Afonso V [[THE FIFTH]] of Portugal invaded this kingdom to have his wife (*) Joanna succeed this kingdom’s ruler Henry IV [[THE FOURTH]] instead of Henry’s sister. For ten points, name this kingdom that was united with the eastern neighbor Aragon by its ruler Isabella.
Answer: Kingdom of Castile (or Reino de Castilla)

6184. The poet of Morgante, Luigi Pulci [[PUHL-chi]], wrote a verse poem celebrating this nobleman's victory in a 1469 jousting tournament. To acquire the support of this man, Sultan Qaitbay presented him with a (+) giraffe which this man let roam the city streets, according to poet Antonio Costanzo. This politician survived an assassination attempt during the Pazzi Conspiracy, an act sanctioned by the sitting Pope and rival of his family (*) Sixtus IV. For ten points, name this "Magnificent" ruler of Florence, the grandson of Cosimo.
Answer: Lorenzo de' Medici (

6185. A passage in Pliny says that an important statue of this god had wool binding around the feet and was hollowed out and filled with oil that was removed only once per year. A fresco discovered at Pompeii shows this god wearing a white veil and carrying a (+) sickle. This god, whom the Romans believes patronized an archaic Golden Age in Italy, was the namesake of a winter (*) festival during which masters waited on slaves. For ten points, identify this father of Jupiter who the Romans worshipped at a cult center on the Capitoline hill.
Answer: Saturn (

6186. A person in this occupation nicknamed "Madre Conchita" likely masterminded the assassination of former president, Alvaro Obregon [[oh-breh-GOHN]] at Bombilla [[bohm-BEE-yah]] Cafe by José de León Toral. The constructed language lingua ignota was created by Hildegard (+) von Bingen, who held this occupation in the County Palatine. Martin Luther first housed and later married a noble named (*) Katharina who once was in this occupation. For ten points, name this monastic profession in the Catholic church held exclusively by women.
Answer: Nuns (

6187. A Venetian convert led a subset of these states and built his namesake mosque to impress Lalla Lalla Oum, a princess of the Kabyle [[KAH-beel]]. Ships of this polity departing from Sale [[SAH-leh]] (+) traveled across the Atlantic during a 17th century raid on Iceland in search of slaves. With assistance from Sweden and Sicily, the U.S. fought two namesake (*) wars with people of these states, culminating in a blockade of Tripoli. For ten points, name these historical “pirate states” of the North African coast.
Answer: Barbary

6188. A letter written by this person known as the Heiligenstadt [[hye-LEE-gen- STOT]] Testament provides a segue between this person’s first and middle periods. This person dedicated a sonata to violinist Rodolphe (+) Kreutzer, who rejected it with disdain. This person wrote a torrid love letter to a person known only as his “Immortal Beloved.” Leonard Bernstein conducted this person’s (*) Symphony No. 9 in Berlin in 1989, changing a word in the title of that symphony's famous "Ode to Joy." For ten points, name this German composer who created Eroica and the Moonlight Sonata before going deaf.
Answer: Ludwig von Beethoven

6189. Composer Aaron Copland [[KOHP-land]] set a speech at one of these events in Alton to music, and the recently invented Pitman Shorthand allowed writers to keep up with the orators at these events. The ability of territories to exclude (+) slavery through local legislation was espoused during these debates in the Freeport Doctrine. A Democrat and a future (*) Republican president vied for a Senate seat in Illinois during, for ten points, which 1858 debates?
Answer: Lincoln-Douglas Debates (Great Debates of

6190. Before assuming his most notable position, this man was told "May God curse your studies" during a recruitment attempt by future ally William Farel. This theologian helped build the case of heresy against Michael (+) Cervetus, who was then burned at the stake. This reformer pleaded with Francis I to stop persecuting the Huguenots in his native country in the preface to his magnum opus, (*) Institutes of the Christian Religion. For ten points, name this French-Swiss reformer who expounded the doctrine of predestination while living in Geneva.
Answer: John Calvin (or Jean Calvin

